---
title: Grammar Construction in the Minimalist Program
layout: page
iflanding: "yes"
---

[Forth](jherring-1)

<span id="anchor"></span>GRAMMAR CONSTRUCTION IN THE MINIMALIST PROGRAM

Joshua Herring

Submitted to the faculty of the University Graduate School in partial
fulfillment of the requirements for the degree Doctor of Philosophy in
the Department of Lingusitics, Indiana University

December 2016

Accepted by the Graduate Faculty, Indiana University, in partial
fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy.

Doctoral Committee

Markus Dickinson, PhD

Steven L. Franks, PhD

Thomas Grano, PhD

Lawrence S. Moss, PhD

15 November 2016

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I would like to thank the members of my committee, Tom Grano, Larry
Moss, and in particular Steven Franks and Markus Dickinson for their
patience and support throughout this unusual process. Additionally I
thank Damir Cavar for mentoring me through my early years in graduate
school, Alexis Lanham for unwavering support, and of course my family,
for believing it could be done.

Joshua Herring

GRAMMAR CONSTRUCTION IN THE MINIMALIST PROGRAM

The Minimalist Program is in principle nothing more than a set of
guidelines for cognitive syntactic research. Because of its historical
pedigree and foundational assumptions, in practice it functions and is
perceived as something closer to a formal theoretical framework. This
opens the door to implementational possibilities. Though it is not
possible to strictly delineate “minimalist” and “non-minimalist”
linguistic theories by choice of theoretical device alone, it is
possible to identify, and make concrete, shared theoretical assumptions
and formal devices that minimalist theories draw from. This project
surveys the recent minimalist literature and catalogs the most important
such devices, unifying them where possible, to build a set of
implementational primitives capable of accurately representing a large
section of recent proposals in Minimalism. The utility of this approach
is demonstrated through the development of a grammar development
software toolkit for the Minimalist Program which makes these primitives
available to researchers. By implementing theories in this system, it is
possible to validate their empirical claims and adjudicate disputes over
empirical coverage between competing theories. Sample implementations
relevant to the ongoing dispute over the Movement Theory of Control are
given.

Markus Dickinson, PhD Steven L. Franks, PhD Thomas Grano, PhD Lawrence
S. Moss, PhD

[Forth](jherring-1)
