---
layout: page
ref: sequencestaxis
lang: eng
published: true
title: Syntax of verbal sequences in Biblical Hebrew
tag: semitic-syntax-morpho
date: 2017-12-01
image: "https://seveleu.com/assets/img/valo%C5%A1kahor.png"
publisher: Maxime Seveleu-Dubrovnik
seo:
  type: BlogPosting
iflanding: "yes"
---


1.  **THE USE OF TENSES IN CLASSICAL BIBLICAL HEBREW**
    
    1.  ***A VEXED QUESTION***

Verbal syntax is undoubtedly a major issue in the study of the grammar
of Biblical Hebrew (BH). This aspect of BH has long been considered an
enigma and, as a result, many potential explanations have been
proposed. In recent years, new and more sophisticated theories based
on modern linguistic models have also been elaborated (for detailed
presentations, see McFall 1982; Cook 2012: 77–175, 273–75).

After briefly presenting the most important approaches to this issue
(§ 1.2), I will put forward my own theory (§ 2). I will then present
supporting data, first regarding *past/anterior* sequences (§ 3) and
then for *non-past/non-anterior* sequences (§ 4). In the corollaries,
I will briefly examine the imperative (§ 5.1) and phasal aspects (§
5.2), then describe the doubling of sequences (§ 5.3). I will
subsequently discuss the usage of this same syntax across the
different literary genres (§ 6.1), the necessity of other kinds of
analysis (§ 6.2) and the problem of diachrony (§ 6.3). I will conclude
with a few final considerations (§ 7).

2.  ***DIFFERENT APPROACHES***

In scholarly research there have been at least seven approaches to the
verbal system:

1.  The traditional view held that *qatal* indicates a past tense and
    *yiqtol* a future tense. A prefixed *waw* has the power to
    “convert,” so to speak, these two tenses. Japhet ha-Levi (10th
    century C.E.) called this prefix “*waw* of future,”
    <span dir="rtl">העתידי</span> <span dir="rtl">וו</span>. Dunash ben
    Labrat (also from the 10th century) referred to it as “*waw*
    oblique,” <span dir="rtl">עוטפת</span> <span dir="rtl">וו</span>.
    David Kimchi (12th century) called it “*waw* of service,”
    <span dir="rtl">השרות</span> <span dir="rtl">וו</span>; and Elias
    Levita (15th century) termed it “*waw* conversive”
    <span dir="rtl">הפוך</span> <span dir="rtl">וו</span> (McFall
    1982: 3, 8, 10, 176). Modern theories have tried to offer more
    nuanced definitions in order to open the way to new approaches,
    coining expres- sions such as “*waw* inductive” (Gell 1821: 76),
    “*waw* consec-

<span id="_bookmark0" class="anchor"></span>\* I would like to thank
Prof. Steven E. Fassberg for his helpful comments on an earlier
version of this study, as well as Elena Hogan for helping me refine
the English of this paper.

2 JOURNAL OF HEBREW SCRIPTURES

utive” (Böttcher 1868: 192–93; Ewald 1891: 244; Driver 1892: 71; GKC §
49), “*waw* relative” (Hitzig 1833: 27)—a definition recently revised
by Waltke and O’Connor (1990: 477)—, or “*waw* inversive” (Joüon and
Muraoka § 117).

2.  Following the aspectual approach, *qatal* and *yiqtol* are not seen
    as tenses, but as aspects: *perfect* and *imperfect*, i.e.,
    “finished” vs. “incomplete” (Ewald 1891: 3) or “completed” vs.
    “incipient” (Driver 1892: 1–6); “constative” vs. *“*cursive”
    (Brockelmann 1956: 39–45); “perfective” vs. “non-perfective” (Waltke
    and O’Connor 1990: 474–78).

3.  According to the historical-comparative approach, the several
    meanings of *qatal* and *yiqtol* can be explained as evolu- tions of
    different older verbal forms. Bauer distinguished between nominal
    (from a West Semitic *qatálta*) that expresses past tense, and
    *waw*-nominal (from a Proto Semitic *qataltá*) that expresses
    future; as well as between a long *yiqtol* (from \**yaqtulu*), which
    expresses present-future, a short *yiqtol* (from *\*yaqtul*) that
    expresses jussive mood, an “Affekt” *yiqtol* (from *\*yaqtula*), ex-
    pressing intention, and a *waw-yiqtol* (from \**yaqtul*), which has
    kept the original protosemitic preterite meaning*.* In other words,
    both in the case of *weqatal* as well as in the case of *way-
    yiqtol*, the *waw* does not change the value of the verb; on the
    contrary, this value is retained (Bauer and Leander 1922: 273– 76).
    Some authors affirm that the *yiqtol* with a preterite meaning can
    be found even without *waw* (Held 1962: 282). This histor-
    ical-comparative approach can also be combined with the
    above-outlined aspectual approach (Meyer 1972: 39–57). In the past
    few years, most scholars have accepted the distinction between short
    *yiqtol* (\**yaqtul*) and long *yiqtol* (\**yaqtulu*; see espe-
    cially Rainey 2003).

4.  The sequential approach: In this approach, the tense value of a
    verbal form is not absolute but is determined by the nature of the
    preceding expression, and it agrees in meaning with the introductory
    dominant verb. There are four kinds of sequences introduced by
    “past,” “future,” “present” and “imperative” (Gell 1821: 8–12;
    Lambdin 1971: 107–9, 118–19, 162–65, 279–82; Jenni 1981: 106–7 and
    for *weqatal* also Driver 1892: 118, 125–29, 143–46). A combination
    of this approach with the aspectual approach is offered by Waltke
    and O’Connor (1990: 525, 554).

5.  The modal approach: According to Joosten (2012: 25–27) *qatal*
    expresses *realis* and represents an action that has taken place
    before the reference time; *wayyiqtol* expresses *realis* and
    denotes events contemporaneous with a point of reference anterior to
    the enunciation; the participle expresses contemporaneity with the
    enunciation; finally, *yiqtol* and *weqatal* are two nonindicative
    forms that express *irrealis* (future-modal). According to Ḥatav
    (1997: 29), on the grounds of a discourse-representation-structure
    analysis, it is necessary to combine sequentiality (*wayyiqtol* and
    *wqatal*) with modality (*wqatal* and *yiqtol*)*,* progression
    (*qotel*) and perfect (*qatal*).

6.  The discourse-pragmatic approach asserts that ver- bal forms do not
    express fixed times or aspects but possess

2 JOURNAL OF HEBREW SCRIPTURES

utive” (Böttcher 1868: 192–93; Ewald 1891: 244; Driver 1892: 71; GKC §
49), “*waw* relative” (Hitzig 1833: 27)—a definition recently revised
by Waltke and O’Connor (1990: 477)—, or “*waw* inversive” (Joüon and
Muraoka § 117).

2)  Following the aspectual approach, *qatal* and *yiqtol* are not seen
    as tenses, but as aspects: *perfect* and *imperfect*, i.e.,
    “finished” vs. “incomplete” (Ewald 1891: 3) or “completed” vs.
    “incipient” (Driver 1892: 1–6); “constative” vs. *“*cursive”
    (Brockelmann 1956: 39–45); “perfective” vs. “non-perfective” (Waltke
    and O’Connor 1990: 474–78).

3)  According to the historical-comparative approach, the several
    meanings of *qatal* and *yiqtol* can be explained as evolu- tions of
    different older verbal forms. Bauer distinguished between nominal
    (from a West Semitic *qatálta*) that expresses past tense, and
    *waw*-nominal (from a Proto Semitic *qataltá*) that expresses
    future; as well as between a long *yiqtol* (from \**yaqtulu*), which
    expresses present-future, a short *yiqtol* (from *\*yaqtul*) that
    expresses jussive mood, an “Affekt” *yiqtol* (from *\*yaqtula*), ex-
    pressing intention, and a *waw-yiqtol* (from \**yaqtul*), which has
    kept the original protosemitic preterite meaning*.* In other words,
    both in the case of *weqatal* as well as in the case of *way-
    yiqtol*, the *waw* does not change the value of the verb; on the
    contrary, this value is retained (Bauer and Leander 1922: 273– 76).
    Some authors affirm that the *yiqtol* with a preterite meaning can
    be found even without *waw* (Held 1962: 282). This histor-
    ical-comparative approach can also be combined with the
    above-outlined aspectual approach (Meyer 1972: 39–57). In the past
    few years, most scholars have accepted the distinction between short
    *yiqtol* (\**yaqtul*) and long *yiqtol* (\**yaqtulu*; see espe-
    cially Rainey 2003).

4)  The sequential approach: In this approach, the tense value of a
    verbal form is not absolute but is determined by the nature of the
    preceding expression, and it agrees in meaning with the introductory
    dominant verb. There are four kinds of sequences introduced by
    “past,” “future,” “present” and “imperative” (Gell 1821: 8–12;
    Lambdin 1971: 107–9, 118–19, 162–65, 279–82; Jenni 1981: 106–7 and
    for *weqatal* also Driver 1892: 118, 125–29, 143–46). A combination
    of this approach with the aspectual approach is offered by Waltke
    and O’Connor (1990: 525, 554).

5)  The modal approach: According to Joosten (2012: 25–27) *qatal*
    expresses *realis* and represents an action that has taken place
    before the reference time; *wayyiqtol* expresses *realis* and
    denotes events contemporaneous with a point of reference anterior to
    the enunciation; the participle expresses contemporaneity with the
    enunciation; finally, *yiqtol* and *weqatal* are two nonindicative
    forms that express *irrealis* (future-modal). According to Ḥatav
    (1997: 29), on the grounds of a discourse-representation-structure
    analysis, it is necessary to combine sequentiality (*wayyiqtol* and
    *wqatal*) with modality (*wqatal* and *yiqtol*)*,* progression
    (*qotel*) and perfect (*qatal*).

6)  The discourse-pragmatic approach asserts that ver- bal forms do not
    express fixed times or aspects but possess

SEQUENCES OF VERBAL FORMS AND TAXIS 3

functions according to the context (narrative or direct speech), the
level of communication (foreground or back- ground) and the axis of
time (past, present, future). In par- ticular, Niccacci (1991: 15–29;
2006) distinguishes the fol- lowing verbal forms and grammatical
constructions: *qatal*, x*- qatal*, *weqatal,* indicative *yiqtol*,
jussive *yiqtol*, x*-yiqtol*, *weyiqtol*, narrative *wayyiqtol*,
continuative *wayyiqtol*, imperative, x- imperative, non-verbal
sentence. In narrative contexts, the form in the foreground is the
narrative *wayyitol*, while in direct speech—in order to express
future—the foreground forms are *yiqtol* and *weqatal.*

7)  The grammaticalization approach views the verbal forms not as fixed
    elements, but as “grams,” i.e., verbal grammatical constructions
    that reflect any portion of the prototypical grammaticalization
    path. Grams acquire and combine values that belong to several
    semantic domains such as taxis, aspect, tense and mood. For Cook,
    *qatal* and *wayyiqtol* are products of the resultative path:
    *qatal* in BH is categorized as perfect-perfective aspect (irrealis
    *qatal* and *weqatal* also derive from *qatal*), *wayyiqtol* is
    categorized as a past tense (in narrative), *yiqtol* is the product
    of the progres- sive path and is categorized in BH as an
    imperfective-irrealis aspect (Cook 2012: 249, 268–71). According to
    Andrason, *qatal*, *yiqtol, weqatal* and *wayyiqtol* are four
    different grams: BH *yiqtol* derives from a split functional
    movement (i.e., as the imperfective and modal ability paths, which
    jointly derive from a single lexically transparent and cognitively
    plausible input), a reduplicated participle as reconstructed for the
    Proto-Semitic \**yaqattal* (Andrason 2010). *Wayyiqtol* (from

*\*yaqtul*) represents a resultative diachrony at an advanced moment
of its development; its consecutive force depends on the incorporation
of a coordinative-consecutive lexeme (*\*wa \<* \**pa*; Andrason
2011a: 44–46). *Weqatal* as well as *qatal* historically derive from
the same construction (the Proto- Semitic verbal resultative adjective
*\*qatal*). The two formations, however, underwent distinct
developments corresponding to different functional paths and therefore
must be treated as two distinct phenomena (Andrason 2011b: 46).
*Weqatal* represents a modal contamination which a Proto-Northwest
Semitic consecutive and contingent input periphrasis (composed of the
contingent coordinative-consecutive lexeme \**wa* and a resulting
verbal adjective \**qatal\[a\]*) originally experienced in conditional
apodoses (Andrason 2011c).

Finally, it can be observed that it is not possible to make a clear
distinction between the different approaches. In particular, while
scholars who proposed the sequential approach did not completely
reject the traditional view that the *waw* has some “power,” even
those scholars who defend the last three approaches admit the
existence of some intro- ductory verbal categories or continuative
forms, as in the sequential approach (see for instance Joosten 2012:
44–45; Cook 2012: 294).

4 JOURNAL OF HEBREW SCRIPTURES

2.  **A NEW APPROACH**

What I propose in this article is a partially new approach: I will
offer a simple descriptive model of the BH verbal system and I will
try to prove that in one phase of BH the prominent func- tions of the
verbal forms depended on a combination of se- quences and taxis*.*

3.  ***THE NEED FOR A NEW APPROACH***

Given the breadth of interpretation offered by previous approaches is
it really necessary to propose a new one? I maintain that it is, for
the following three reasons:

1.  This approach allows us to explain some sentences that up to now
    have remained obscure, especially in poetic texts;

2.  it can help explain more precisely some sentences that we understand
    now in a generic way only;

3.  it can help us better understand the evolution of BH.
    
    4.  ***AN EMPIRICAL DATA COLLECTION***

This study is not based on panchronic methodology, diachronic
analysis, or comparative linguistics. It only represents the first
step toward a more complete analysis, i.e., it offers an empirical
data collection based on synchronic analysis.

In this article I present a list of examples, providing either my own
translation, that of the *Revised Standard Version* (RSV) or, more
frequently, that of the *New Revised Standard Version* (NRSV). I pay
special attention to instances that are considered marginal—or even
incorrect—according to other approaches.

5.  ***ONLY ONE PH ASE***

There is no doubt that BH is composed of different functional
languages (Zatelli 2004). The aim of the present study is not to offer
a solution that is valid for all kinds of BH, but to propose an
explanation for the syntax of *one* phase in the language’s
development. This syntax was the dominant one, though not the only
one, in Standard BH (compare § 6.3), both in prose and in poetry. I
will therefore not be dealing with Archaic BH or Late BH, as they lie
outside the scope of this contribution.

6.  ***SUFFIX CONJUGATION AND PREFIX CONJUGATION***

As we have seen, most scholars distinguish the following verbal and
nominal forms in BH: long *yiqtol*, short *yiqtol*, *wayyiqtol*,
*qatal*, *weqatal*, *qotel*, imperative. In this study it is not
possible to examine the entire verbal system and for reasons of space
I will omit the discussion of *qotel*.

The distinction between long *yiqtol*
(<span dir="rtl">ֶה</span>שׂﬠ<span dir="rtl">ֲ</span>
<span dir="rtl">ַי</span> ), short *yiqtol*
(שׂ<span dir="rtl">ַ</span>ﬠ<span dir="rtl">ַי</span> ) and
*wayyiqtol* (שׂ<span dir="rtl">ַ</span>ﬠיּ<span dir="rtl">ַ</span>
<span dir="rtl">ַו</span> ) corresponds to the morphological aspect of
the verb and it is fully acceptable from a historical point of view
(Joosten 2012: 13–15, among others). The same could perhaps be
hypothesized for the distinction between *qatal* and *weqatal* (see
for instance Andersen 2000: 39–42).

Nevertheless, it is necessary to distinguish between the morphological
and historical aspects of the verbal forms and their syntactical use.

SEQUENCES OF VERBAL FORMS AND TAXIS 5

In Standard BH, one finds different verbal forms in the same sentence
that have the same syntactical value, especially in poetry: *yiqtol*
can be found alongside *wayyiqtol* (3.4.1: Gen 37:7; Isa 63:3; 3.4.3:
1 Sam 1:10–11; 1 Kgs 1:1; 2 Sam 2:28; 3.4.3:

Deut 4:41; 2:12; 3.4.4: Ps 8:6–7; 24:2; 44:3.10; 66:6; 69:22;

74:14b; 78:13–15.20.42–50.64; 80:6–7; 81:7–8; 105:40; 114:3;

Jer 2:14–15), *wayyiqtol* occurs after *yiqtol* (4.3.3: Ps 42:6) and
*qatal* can be found where one would expect *weqatal* (4.4.1: Gen
17:15–16; Lev 26:44; 4.4.2 Ps 11:2; 4.4.3: Ps 73:18; 110:6;

132:17; Isa 11:8; 19:7; 51:1; 4.4.3: Ps 110:6; 132:17; 5.1: Ps

22:22; 71:3).

For this reason I hypothesize that *at one point in the develop- ment
of BH*, long and short *yiqtol* and *wayyiqtol* were used in an
analogous way—presumably due to their similarity—and the same was true
for *qatal* and *weqatal*. I identify the first unit (long and short
*yiqtol + wayyiqtol*) as Prefix Conjugation (PC; see Fig- ure 1) and
the second (*qatal* and *weqatal*) as Suffix Conjugation (SC; see
Figure 2).



<svg width="285" height="173">
  <image id="image0" width="285" height="173" x="0" y="0"
    xlink:href="data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAR0AAACtCAIAAAACtTztAAAABGdBTUEAALGPC/xhBQAAACBjSFJN
AAB6JgAAgIQAAPoAAACA6AAAdTAAAOpgAAA6mAAAF3CculE8AAAABmJLR0QA/wD/AP+gvaeTAAAA
CXBIWXMAAA7DAAAOwwHHb6hkAAAAB3RJTUUH4woWFSELYmZ+ngAAf8JJREFUeNrsfXd8ZEeV9blV
9d7rbkkjaXLO2eOccTYYbKINxiYY8AImZ1jDR15YMizLAku2ccABZ+OMc8722OPJOc9opFHs7veq
6t7vj/e61dJITuvFa9Pnp19L6n79Yp2qW7fuPZdEyvAAaYh4X9RhU+KVUtDwRInzTLrBCaxDSHFo
FCRggVKcOKtNJIBFOYTRzgDw5EV7DQUhiCaCAESAQMiWXCk0EXFEAvJMIVgce2XIgCEBW3hGQEAE
wMVQffAOQatDEAMAGuDgekEGKrCImKABcaXAeCQeuhkKPQKtkAcTAFFCIAEAEAMAFOqo438ZShxD
KdgEBG1y1WZHpAFltAEYQBggMEG5r6dj59Znnn6qN2ZLIQCBC6AJAgcAQgAMAwwhle4HIuKdI1Bk
onT/SoGMYu8VKWMMAFD2klLAexFrAQOTExYRKEAEgMBEoAjQYKcBZh+YQKyF1gC8RaCQiHu5b2wd
/9QwpMymdetuuvGqm2+6dduOvpKVqbNmK40QUOQ2bVuxY1f3N7/1q7e97cQgQhjQa084dvGKtX+6
+vbXnXh0BBg4MBFpaEBASnuAQIrExokCdBgyQwcKYMdsVOAc60CBoIggZJMkMCEUvHPKKAUQoLUg
MOBYoMgYk76Zjn4IWIwiBNoBVpQulYt5Q11tbddd+9d7H33imz/9QfOIxrQ7qKOOlwUGoltaRhx0
4N6LFz9x7XX35Rpb33PmGUFgtFfWlvnxvkeeuGHJkiXveueJSRwbyIIFe+3sihsa8opAYIKG0hAF
BbBX0LFzRBLqIIgMRHnHOlDOx1prowLrfBQGzkIp61wShvkgDMWDCMYYC9aA82ARpQ2ICPCelIZi
1iRMJNAOCAgaYLYiyOfym9Y8c+F5F/7x9xdHzSPz+XydUnW8vDBQqqm5ef/DDvyAc//9h+tmzpz7
sY+fFYYmFCUCqA9fcc3fnnhyEwhRFIHVHy++yjmhUACngd5iEhYakkQaFUOL+HLeGEYQJzYfaufi
wEQiABGDABUYBUAHIOhQRxCwtSoInINRgHfQOtCkRMOJ90WdC0VTwlBxEoQG2jCgdWouKoUAWgPc
19c3d86crq6uKWMnOOeCQL/cN7aOf2ooCLy1AEdRqKGFNHt4bwHEsQPMQYccctAB+4IBEZc4eBhN
Cj6OuxObNBQaBAgjgtawVmkBxDOiMAAQBFqYRQAVOBEIC/vEI/EoJ7F3FvAq0AzoAIAKtNEgBYAB
TToXAOQAKARRDkol1jGgUh+ECJQulxMA8/fZ561vfWtLS0u5XPbeczZNA1BxWtRRxz8QBgSdCyDc
3t5uIkpcnDgp5CMRn8urrTvbJk+YPvbEacKA1sZEsH79pg16ZMOY0WMCKAg0YcvGrWuXPRMaRC2F
plGj89HIMAyT4q5NG9cbnW8aMXLc9ClhaHa17Vi7ep0KGseOHzdz+kTxMeB6dneu2NC23/4Ld27d
unnzxkV77w+gkAvElh9/9MHuYjx2yt5Tpk224hryhqSEcqLDAoDUl5HL5QAHoLOzs6WlpccyAA0i
COqMquNlggIAZpBqbmkqx8UgF4Vh5Bkgv/ipx7//vZ90dZejgAKDXbt2/OyHP5o3fdKB++27asO2
IpRI7Ms9n/3U5z/x8U8HYW7dxg3vePvJhx100DEnvOGjn/zMli2bOjt2nvDaY4844vAdO9tDE8Xl
0v333X3kEa/52Cc+VYzthg0bPv2xD8+bM/MjH/3kz39x7qGHH3b4YYd/+ewvFfLR32+66V3veve9
Dz506+13HH3Ewa857IgHn1jSnUgujHJaACCzLZUAcB7WNTQ0xOWy1rpQKPg6pep4WWFAmdFk40Qb
vXPn9quu/FvziBC+46orr+kpBVGYE/YsLtSmeURDX+fOMNfYxxEDikr333njlVdc9/4PfeLwY446
8pgDnn78vp/96s9HvvGQT3/uc3vNGdVkFu61cO7Gre1aFzwwc8aUM9576le++aN8wwgoI4QRTWHH
7l6/befa9VuOOfq4u++6cdzopr6ujl//9znHHHfC+886U5NtzIVf/db3fvPHi/c6YL9mKBDD9QkF
0KFjBATSGjDOOa01i9gkKeRC1KlVx8sHAwAi8KyUgValuNzevnvLxl2FqLx9+/YyN5KBAimtmpoa
Pvyxjz14xy1X3HRbrtDgAZS6/vCbX/aW3CmnneEArXDGqW8/7/yLN23dNmvB/BH52PW0NeRDEXGc
TnPY2XJra6uAYmtnzZjxxS9+6tprr9/cLe//4EcP2XuM9r1Q/K+f/dLGLdsX7n/ow48/KXHXrGmT
mwvRlX+54N1nvPdNRy3MBwYMYhZAKxAAFggTS4qX+5bWUQcMM5TWEMXMPuExY8efeurbx45ugO3Z
a9F+19x0l3NMEYn1pAmEoKHRkwp80ghAy+bNm/ssm0IDKcBya0szwfd0d0QRnIgOTC4MtEJsHQEQ
ZwhEFMc2yuUsiq3NjUohyDdMnj5GAPZWJeXtGzds7+w677IrQ+lrDHwQJwfsc8C2Eo9uCSgwvWXf
GAQgtkmiw5CQBnSkv0kpRUQv912t458dpv8vUlDGmLB1ZGNgoE3hqKOOTnQu8WWSPERBSbm3u1js
ZXaBEgago+NOOPH2Jy+++46b9pr6dgQ5L6an6I475MCcAonyjpK4pCDNzc2xR4FtEpe896S1E0RA
qdQHSK6xqRijnENjGPhtm1YsfWrWvCN/8d8/aAJCdso76FCU6rY+BqJc5EuxNhSGxrGH0gAgICKd
Og/rqOPlhiGlACCx1loAXqAUrPPsOQxyrzvu2NQXD23g41xjlNO+EIgQlQRNuuWLX/3Wlm793S9/
vIW7Jk+e+Ktf/+fpH/rQj/7jxwUAgBUJw9B729vbPXp0DjpoamgslssNTY3WOaVJKeOYdWDCBugA
SByJy4XB6rUbN22O95ocOR+DEQbYtnFT0NScax1hgYActAIMEYkIiaBq/rEwc31duI6XFypOYogg
iHJRHlrFNk6cEFEQhiIi4NiXbCkBFODhEpAnBXYuRxCofHPzvvssOmDfvZc8vfi22+6Yv/cBX/na
v4VaGBaA0blSqRSFRofaEMCq2FPM5/Ptne25yAiEiJi5s7cncSAAYaSam6fPnLFt1fJ7bv87AzqI
gigEcNtdd2/etMU5BIDOApsAgEAgglKaqpGNVA+trePlhYnCCFwCVKkUg1lrrRQZTd46Hegi4lCb
IBfAWYTElhFExZLX3kcASe+f/vDHH/703Iv+cvm86eMVeRU2dJeLoVYMtl7lwvzMaTPvfmDpQw89
2HLCazu3rzn3T38uF4vFYnFbW9u0MTkSKuQbR0SNKjVIWSHXcupp7/rrLY98+bMffuapD/zL+95d
EHfZX6/a1l0++qS3jDCwca8EOSLjXKKNqbr9Kl6Lut+ijpcfhsAQAQWxFfi4XO7q6+lrGNVgtC6X
S2EutN5BBd47zVBBbld3r2hwuUwMKL1i1coNa9d/7RvfmDFppC31BmFBAr3/EQeeccYZTWGTiJsy
Y2YQ4le/+Em5Z9eq+2/zzjU25BY/9shVl1/66Y+8XyHXvru3J9xZ3B2rfMSiFAfHvPb1xxxxyC13
3POn3/9u8WOP6HLfpo1b/t/3fzJu9AgFa8DCRAbKaAKEmUggKvZcdtYSs3OE8OW+sXX8U0N/+9vf
2Lply4Xn/+XCSy5rbh3d1JB/6snHkiSeNWt2mIuc86HRGqKM2rJ503nnnvfwE0+OHD1u86ato0eN
nD5tyuSJU5c8syoyZv26dTvadmzZvnnHzm2XXHzljTf+/bTTTo1y4WGvOXzU6FEP3HffmpXLP/+5
z7317e9Yumzpx8/60PFHHd3V3vEf//Hr3V2lEY2Ny596fMbkKRMnTiStg7Dwnve9f/bcObt27Oxs
b99v331/+atfnviG1ylAg5QJSWkABAUQKXLO3XXHXb/8zW+7+vpyDYU1q1ZFUTB96jQwGAQQSCjz
GdZdhXX8I0AiSam3d+XqNR2du5saWxNny4kbPXr0zJkzc7lIvFMK4rwxyiXx4qefjm05yjV0dvQt
XLhwwvjWG264YfHjS045+Z2xs8Vib77RlMrJvfc99sdzzr34sgv3WTBfw7e1bd+wYVNDQ8PMmTOD
IHjmmaVz5szJ5xo6OjqefPIpY8JcLlcqlWbNnDN5ynjnnIgEQdDT07Np06ZisdjY2Dh37tzUez6k
D917v2nTpu3btwNgZqXUyJEjZ8+ena5lUQUv962u458JPukTSbwrO18WES9cTKwTKTvvRLywF5fE
JZsURRKb9Ikk1pfTucxFf/nz5Elj161aLVbEi7DESR+L37hl54c+9pmNbTtjsYkreS6LJCJJYovl
uFfEWxs7l4h4Zvbep3uz1ieJS1Eqlarvi4j3npmZWfZAykNrbRzHte/4GkgddfxjYdKOXCnlGSIi
EK21AEopVLr/IAicSyBkgiBO4iDMJ4kjoq6url27dh1//PHvO+MDRx5zbC4XtnVsfeTRx1et3Pil
s78yYfQYx0mkDbMDwTOLpPYYpEKVIIicc3FsoygiIq2VCKeHBpCyIgzD6hf3hNY6Pf/U5w4gc77X
/Pty9111/NOBhBMRESEBiHS6nJXSxhjt2SmldBosxCwiSmuBissulwu3bF5/9tlnX3vNDaVSPGHC
hHw+mjRlohD+5cyPnfH+d5eSJB8aZ8tGa610dVHJWhtFEQDnHJFWSnnvUWGyc46ItNZKqSr7q0wb
kiQyMHZp0FdQp1Yd/3AQ+5iUApSIJIlTRhttAHgvWhMAYa40UQbg2QuUUYH3XpGQQtfu3k2btvT2
9kZRYEI9Z978KIwcg9LgPXGalLU2CILqsJMSSWudBtSnoyKAJEmqo1N14/TT4Qaf6nfTMRBAJpgB
oEK56reeZdyro46XECRiAVTkYhQAAaz1acpt2gZFPBGlvGIGKUVQzjmtQErZ2AVBAEVJ4sLQpGNH
4gGw0ZleRYokSYwxlZGEvfepFQeAmVPvgveCinWXwntfdTwMx4rq19O/mbmWXVXUeVXHPwYKQDUI
KLWgAKSkco4H9PdCEFFKec5GG4KGqCAIQCSCMDQA2Iu13miISEqqLELK+zAMlVLpv1VUjUBrbdru
U1JVT0Zr/SxkqJ5hbfTSkKSqo45/GEjEA6hV1audrNQ052qrVZV/Ve3EpvK3GvQ19RzDw56hfPUg
pDpe8Xj+/bragwNc4cAeM5+6qVXHPzfMnuPD8KSo3ZIH/UtEWeQ7pSMeP7+Rpz461fEqxP+kWTPR
UNnuAoDrsph1/DPjfzS/F6TETOkl/RrUdVLV8c+NFz5ePVseBj/P7eqo49WNl2x6IwOYNIhU9eGr
jn8uvHA7sN+tMYiTqsbJXncI1vFPjRc9v1IDl6bUwJWrPSlXRx3/RCCpC+7VUcdLjfpIUkcdLz3q
vKqjjpcedV7VUcdLjzqv6qjjpUedV3XU8dKjzqs66njpUedVHXW89Kjzqo46XnrUeVVHHS896ryq
o46XHnVe1VHHS486r+qo46VHnVd11PHSw1SSDgcTbBi1Mwy32TDbcEVARlU3puz99Pvq2b8/5OHS
PH/JElWy85fKkSjbKNtm8L4ruxCA4ABIJVmmureB3+J05/3v1PwjlaMPJQiHZ+22+HlsU8crFWZw
EydAIATOfgsACGtSlQ2y7UUIRJxmCgsCQnVXlXaZkspCFBAJIVUq1GACC4Sytpk1LMna5tA8r/1M
p8q7UApM4gAFVo7ACgSEAKxFABA8FAAtNdQShihR8ARCrKAYBgIWGAXxidLaiSJK2cbwDtpYr4QQ
KhAYTEirNxAXXTEwkQbEwehUOJsrNSOrym979ln9ujo0/MXW8cqFGpwzL7W/iSHWW00KIuISpCK4
KW2IADgGBnbXMkCNSfobkKCmtJtw2v5EVY9IwwjOUM3rULliItam5xCnkrcMqEztcIhickxg4aw5
KwbYAgCp/mOnhPDCgE91trWuDI5OkElqO4Y1JhKQQEmq8cZSe8l1/NNCDWeBVYYSCnQAsIgno0BM
xnjAWs/OM5D20ZURJx3TVL/WhRAQgnQqf6HBGhbC6e49yKffyEjjAE9gquEDAZD+16xQAlT/qXtP
QZBuWlDQcNY5KA3SSAeydN9SGVgBaKrwM1ASGp1qjjIjUUrDqaoqPcBkFItzcWYsCikRBlvYXnEx
EPQkIoKskjg5AASd1hKv3OE9762q/tQHq1clKs9eBj9dghBIIDYpASBFrq/vmSVLtnV0OoC5X35d
wQK2digZKMukBabCHA/hms2UB3z/KFT9VFW/nH1Wea0ZfCqtPz0Fgo1Zg0Wc0gYEZggAEUi204qd
mX0vcYlAEzQBzOKQJJIAGl6LAwFakcADSpGKglRoXkAEDWhiF2/ZsH7bzl35MBACezDHgM9uSf/P
s9z5OqletVCSTsprraXU4GFWgHifC6NiT/fvfvXL/ffb55BDDlm8dEWPQxgF2hiBECzEDTLSMkuo
QhKutul0NkYQQENpKAb84PGyhlR7QgY4QgCQCZyzzkpkFMSS4Kmly1av32oFzkta4rFGyYYgHgSC
hCZUQnAAe++KCuRBcAQNcFUgW3F6LAY8goBEYUd721VXX/Gu007fe+G+v/v9OcVy9bwFJJVO6nkQ
RlAXg3u1YujHT4BWWuDZ+dS8G9Xa7GypVIp7y7Ey8ABEhBMFEPnqZEZqZ0giYKHanUJDgnSMAkj3
k6Oi8UmoOt+GAgMM4YEN0igdgBNSjiDbt2775rf/7Ze/+S2DJKMUAMnKdqvUcmWWTDaKfQLiMDJl
eKKctR4CoyGSum2MIMgmYppjH3vYMSNbDz/k0ImTppYSHHrI4YUcmOGdQCl4Gf7Ma1Bn1KsdA62R
gXN8AoVhmJRKoVGnvvtd73z72wONsFAQwAm891oEcNnW2QSmVvk2pUENeUhBKZ8VB1JgDuAMmCT9
lADlK6NazRyLq05IiE/HLF85SSsgpYwSxH1g39HRsWbD+g1bNiGr2K2hiKgygiKjLbMCIOyUEVDS
2d724AOPA1pTNn1TxMxgGAV4B3ExyCqtGFaTjB05asv2rjnz9z700EMJ8BZBUDH/Uou6nzk88KeO
fwo8m86ZMAgS5nJgC0h3V7tS6CuVBSCCDhSEAO+9aJ363xRXxqu00mO6H84840pSp0Q2NVIQJlgN
JRRVPAkkNY72PTwqnJ5TOiVLT10RLEtIQKBBmDdnzvd/+KOm1pFERCmzKqNhpnYtBCKtoAAiB+0Q
J089tfTOB596zWFHqkjBWjiPwKReRW9hDKADwAtYg8BJz+7dDz+2ZJ9Dj2xpDgUoRCAWEZA2Awci
3uMV9TnVPwMG8ap/VRRpwV8RIF1n4sZCznvk8/m06Qs7EgtNa9dv2bBhU+T9gvmLmidNFoXEcWgE
4J4dbVt7aPrsaezc00sWeyrMWzA/l9cKSpjTZdlise/xp57q6OiYNKqpdfQo0zjWASMb840NOWII
vFGpO9ATGOQB2JSr7I0iFmhF4kHeQ1Oo6PUnHOMAn/hcqK1NjDGpbxDiiciTShxCk65E9YH9Ddff
ftanzv79JVdpArwD2dRkJChJ14wF1jkK02UwC0nuu/uOjVt2fveMf7EO+dQpQ+lSn2LvldYA2Htl
0jOHQNJ6rRVnvghnxH+5G0Ad/yuo5dUQVoqIUI1TIh2eHKABdnbnjq1fOPvLptDyxhNPeubBe999
+ruOfdMp3//pf4wb17p27arf/OBbf73syjELjvjsF7500R//a9Wyp7bs2HXAIYdedvlVI5oaR+QM
FP3ut3/63R//9OnPnT1j6sQvfu7TDz/6ePOUuQv23u+sM9972ilvhQJBl+KiMcY59+QjD9x23RWP
Ln7mU9/55X4H7lNQun3X9k989uzJkyf/9IffffLhh6679C933P8oTZr/x/MumNyoS8XufL7Q29f3
mz+cs3bt2pF5c9RRRy9Zu2356jU/++G/Nzdg6eKHf//7P/7md1fmRkw877zz+no7TnvTsfDc15tc
cc0Vjz72mFaqc+f2U0897fVveVtqxvk4jkxy6cUXjJk2ba/9DgwNFMBO0trmWRllz8ysAwOwFxYR
rUirIF0yFnEKmjSyhfc6Xo14Lpsk9aULpT40AJqRA0rFbh2qP/zxnMeeWPKxT33u5FPe+ZnPffqo
ow65+spLLr/0IgBhmJswblRvb7xt5657H1l89Ovf8PVvfWP/BVMfu/eehx55LFeI4JKOrdt/9acL
xk6b+973vvvYIw7/2AfPVIzGxhEf/NCHDz74YACxc559LsoZrYrF4urVq5945KGbbrr77vse1ArW
+VCb++6+5/zzz9+0Y8fYiZOmT5322ENPAGho1Eni8/mC2OQ3//3fd9z74OGvOfLE44996L57fvFf
v122cp3WBLjx41oPPejgfOO4/Q444p2nnLxg3nRwAuDXv/nT+RdcdOAhB5940vHEfd/7/rfXrN8W
CwRoigro7d6wYe3MubMmTW1KJ1XEBAEpBIFy1pKGDgxSmxNKKeNBiWcrIlBEJhumRJyLX+4GUMf/
DliE01K+4kUsi03fSX+8F2Evrk9c59c/+d4c4aq7HtktIlL8+/UX60D9+L9+XRYpWhYpJt3bFs2Z
0tCQv+aWu5xIcevSBVNax8468NENxR4WkeSWv/4+B5z97R/1sogr/+w730TQ8IsLL0tExJekY/Nh
e80JRox5fN2OkkjC4kQS9iw+tkXH1iddnesemzYmf8wp72sTcSI+Lv79ljtOfdd7N+3YVi533nXV
XwrAL8+/dJeIiJR27zr+6CP23me/rbuLTkRs9/e+8gUEY/7jD5c7EZF28euvvfjXQMuv/3hTLFIs
9+zasf6wg/ebM3vR5m2dsXcixZ6dqyaMbHzdW87o9FJkseXdD9xwfhPhqz/6zw6RXi/C4hORRGxS
FElEbJKUS6WSY88iViTh7Fpc/1213luR9KeOVyEU1cTOVafc/a6rrMTVgKhZ5wGUFz/5iFfR+Klz
4wShIed80Jg/cJ+5tq+0fPlKAVgc4KZMmdLUkieCQBoKOQ3s6uwEAcJbNqyFNlFDo7BABLl8a2sr
kd7d0SUM5xwARcp5F5hAkVLGNI9sHdnS0tXdGzsk5UQFwfiJExfMX5jPmSgKH1+8VGs1d+7sHACx
f7v6qjvvfeiTn//XEY15DYZ3vb29IL33/gewMJdKSOzypcuBYPZeC8GSj+iaa65/4sml73v/mePH
Nye2DHhvy6NGta7duHXXbuQIJgjWb2lLFI487GAA3jkhKAMYmCAAIIwgiHK5nCLFnE3UiOAYjuEE
TgClSVViVCp4uTvYOl5KDGEHMvr9eBkqT50Iin1BA0gefOAeeFDYGAVQgDY5EB164KIAWPL0Mgbi
UpHg+8p96ZReRBwozAMqBAB2b3zTSbDl2268USmAPcrlrVu2z5wxa+rUqYFCLjApodl5AuJyGQJo
mjZl8tat25IY+VzYvnXbOX8+/5RTThk1oqG4u+Mvf7167t4HH3rwARpY9/TjZ3/pc29/9wdOe+97
IgOI7d2++bLLLjvwNUfMXzBDkVJhHr3xpZdcsdehhx146BSFZN3q5V86+//NnL3X5770RcfIR5F1
yfatW9av3zRp2vRCI0gYSXL+xVfNnr/XgfvtmwdyoWJwdqM8fGxJKREIUC67tvbOjs6idRCBVtAq
C14iEKBEyLnae1yn1qsHlcWWPZBFDkl1M8VpELfzGkh2bU3KvQjy7d2x92CH7lIJQGtjzgDNI1oF
yBciQhwapQkGUKTLOtidwJZdGrq3YK+5ixbMeeKeOzZtXodAL178dGdnz1ve8rZxoyMASeKcYxaO
oghALpeDdzCmZcSI3u6eJAEEDz300OgxE/baewF8sbNjx4btnXP2OThQiGAfvvf29va+w447UQIY
FsR9Tz72+K6OzllzZzUUkFgGgo7tHevXbz3kiENLDkbx8qef6ewsHX7EsUEOpODgAhMtX75SBBMm
TixEgCv6vq4nl25YtN8RDWGOOGHEFtYRhABltInEo1yOAQSB2bat7cEHHl22bJ0XOM6WB0TgPTx7
ETHmf1Qvs47/szDAoHUiVa1tOhCUrngyMwHh6PEHHnz4tXde+vC9d37qtGMUI59v8OjrKTsCDjv0
QAJYRChwLkk99wKxpAA0N7eyB5SaOHvm7379X//2/Z9841vfHD9ylC7Zy6/626KjjrCSLiAZrVAd
NW2SBEGAxEybMcveswbeP/jgE8tWrPnIp76kCSD+21VXtHV0nn7GmRpwtnz9NVc3N+gDDzxQASC/
be3aL371O2Wv3/Oud3pGGChweN6lV5Yt3viGY0cEAHDHnfcEOnrDG15PAs9xqHV3d/dv/nSRzjd8
+IPvCwCQu/raa3d39pz05lOiSBNpi5ICACfQ5AnQpJF2BFpj9uyZ48aP37hl6yWXXBtF0cSJE2fO
mjFudKPSgOgsqGvAih2GuvMVyAuoKzZw2zTy63lWUq/jJYABqg9BVePEUxDS+Ic0hJDihEkjDAwD
QMv7PvLZP1x823V/+e2j737zIYceqIG+kv/j5Tcf9cYT3v6W14csic7FbAqCvEkXeSlnQggSttCA
l6UPPnDau//lmz/86Vvf+maObYOKurp6+nb3NY1qgIH10GBxMZnAWh+EIXyCoHHUxGm2Z/cVF50X
JD1nfeyTjU0a3iLuveqqK2YsmjN+2qTLL7/2pKMO6u5LHEvcuSOHGbfedOOD996ztc9MX3TI0Yfv
H4iDoBzHl998xz6HHXTI3nOuvfTyE1935IK9D7D+nEDHysdRoAX8xX/96m0PLbvgL5cdd/BcjQRK
LrvmmnHjRy9cMOfcC69845ve0NoaaWID8T5WJucsDAHk0/itXF5H+aZRY+cdsP+83hK2bN762OOL
u7q6RraOnTl71sSJrYUcACh4BQWIVB4DAHYAoHX2LDjLJEsfDCObmJFSCshWGWtR5RD1T5aHivao
jbemZ8t8q+MFQQ2IEqqBcBqF5DmJQYTEJd4nFkm5BKC9pzx9+oKz3vfe4u7tv/3vX7a1tbF3N954
y7b2vnef+RENB0kY2rLu6+1RnFmVSSkB0N3bXXaAt5s2bNy2o+0X//Wrj3/s0/969lc/8/kv/PAn
Pz7/vHPXrd7UUxSlAeHUuW+CoJzE0EYcTKERLr7nztv2O+CgptZGZiji4u7uzVu3mVx0+51/7+vq
HNnSunDv/btLfO1Vf73wvAtvuO7aWfMWxCo/b58DI00NWkR8e2dnW3cftLn7tpvat2/KRYW99tl/
xIjCww/dFwRamK+64spbbr797ae/76Q3nxQXu4jLfZ27N2zabIy6+porTBiJDgwZBQX4NGi+kgea
jUIKrChruQ15zJkz8dBDD54+Y1ZH5+6HH33skcdWrF3fBZAg9GKsV477k7eUQRq84VkgUDojlXcO
TIAi0kpVOfDsc7NhM1b6I9fqC2kvKfS3v/0tAHveV0WUBiIRobdz91VXXnHf/Q+0jBy1duOWXGHE
PovmKcjRRxx50htOvPvuey++5JIbbrqetPrmN7/12uOO19Ab16/5wfe/09XTm28et2H9pplTJj/2
8IMXX3RRlC90llyg6OA542fPnL52S1tv2RX74k0bN25cu2bLls133HHnz3/xX6ec+o5xY0dqdtC6
WC6RUmEQAkykN23adOud933vBz94/WuPVIAmEDujZPHSFd1OnXbqae86+Y1EtN+ivRPnbrjtjtbW
5n//xlc2bth8zrmX/OvXvrb/3rMJXkRyudzqlavbdu489tjjzzzzX8IwmjRp8hvf9MZ77733qiuv
eOSRR3bs2PnDH/30gx9+n9EoBAbEkthVq9Z298Xveu/7TjzphBEF7bwA3pDSymSjPYGgIJR6KIig
QdXWm8vpKZNHL9pr1sIFM73FhvUb77vnyS2bd1trGpsawxAEeIbzXsgTMZGQEiJmYRbPLCYwtVEa
Ij4N2yDIHj/pdjTcT9UTTMQ1S9R1hr0EIJE0hLXfk56CvddapyF5Pi4vX7qko6OjqWVUV6JzjQ0H
7TMPnGhoQC99ell75+6Ey/MWLhg/bhKzhIp2bd+yYc0zFIW745zS+UVzZxa72tevWRGNaOmUqClS
R8wbvXn1ql+cd81b3vkBY4wrl5oKurena9u2jm//+/c/84UvfvDMd2ufaA2Qiq0TEYjPGXPhRZfe
+/CTP/rJzwshNMHFcZhTvm/3ph3b28rhXgvn5z0TOyi1ddPmNdt2zp09fdyohi986gu/v+y2q6+7
4ehD5hqyBEps0rFr9+bNm/fZZ78wDJ1zxhgiWb58+c4dO7Sm2bNnjx0/uSTQBErKASWk9Zb1G9q6
y4v2O8ADXgBBpKDhADBDqZr4wIE51JYljf9FJR/ZetgEa1bvWL9u8+7OtvHjx86dN2Pc+NZClH3L
sWNvtSallIho0oBSUJkJSEQkIgLiTNGgf0SquKNqE3howKxr4ADXb7BQ3Q58KTAsr4A0k89qBVXR
aGGG6MADiq1WQqJ82epcHoAQW/GeEepAHBsDSAkgRwXLiAjwopRAqR4gBNpW3Hfqyaec9YXvv/df
PmwMvENkGOIFwee/9NUT3/yW1x13OGwsPgly+eqk46brr9u4edu73v/hXD6wZSmEmRoAxCYiVhUM
IUoSQJwTk8uJAsH1tW153RveFI1feOU1fx0RwNtyFITOOREKgiANPkov2XuvNQEoFouFQqEUJzrK
WS8NWsAulaQpxUmYa+opJ8YEOUMacNYGgQaYGYqGcvERV2+vgBhIc0bTnH4vKJexc2f72rXr29ra
oigaPXrk/AXzRo7M6TTjX9hQuuJQDrSBZyLSaegUIEIiotQeyakVFj1LsBQP/K3qvHqJMKyfVwQs
YOYgiJyNNTMZQ4S+os0XAq20eEsKOhfFxWJUKMSJDcLIs2MFY5R3iQYLACPeehijFHESl5mDQiHh
cmdn9/qNbZ/+9KcffnL54YcfMW3qRFve/fgTj9537yNnfOCDxx59eLEvGdEQiKYtW7Z98YtfnDt3
bj6fnzxpwnve+958Pujps1FgiABnBV50oDRFgPeOmVUQGq28iAIBcsNNNz76xDM/+vW/5gIklokZ
gFLK2izdhJmttVEUEZEIEUnm3I9yHog0Oee1MJyjMMjncrEtNuYK6Xedg1ImY414kBnsuMtIlR1L
gSqiIuK8dxQapRrymDZt1Ixpo5xgd0fc3r77nrvvLxaLI0e27L3PookTWzzArAJdIDDpLCtZsv0N
0BcBXkBylxrozWAo/Xy/WsezYdj5VWa1K6MIIKWMBpFzHOYCyrztDM9EMGEIkDYmtgmRcs4FRntn
2Tsd5pmhjTEEG5dNpIMwtCCIH99SCAP98JNL777r3scef/yqK/565x23bt2y7aijjjn99NMbGqIw
1Ek5DoJg3bp1Z5999uLFiw855JD3v+/9TU3NlikfafGiFBFAxjARkbauHBmjgDhOlA5I0aYNqxc/
/ugfzzlnxeq1U2fOOfigI1qbwkCbJLHGBMaYcrkcRVGSOGMCZlGKnHMiMCaw1nlhhvfeaihtQtIG
7KEVIE6c9wLowEAReeeJvNIK0IPvJVWzySoTIxGQEEgr5V2itSaIZy8Mo6ihYEaObGwdNSowwfad
bevWburp4caG0YUCvIdlMUqlGlM2VdNIM2Gk396jdFAkAQSUhdQQgSSdiQ3ODqfKh6h7A18iPJsd
CMA51lopAjMzszYGgPdiNAHsbGxMAFLMTKQde6WNAqyzodHCjoiEAuc40AqcpDP5HkuFQGvuAQTU
8OQzK4t9JU1oaszNnTtXoIxRzoFIjCZrY2PM4sWLR44cOXXqVO+91gELmKE12ItODVQSD58GkGsd
iM8Ghd0d21asWBY7mys0O8lNGD9p6qQxilgpxczee2MMEWUGWRa/TyKSJEk6ZAnSxmu8Za0V4KFS
1UEFaJGKjSwC5QBGml8stfMZTncNGniDhYVAUL6SNAIol+YNkALgBIqQWKxf275s+cpisdzc0jB3
3rQxo1ubR6QxK0jzMNlBm3Q1RKiqIEIMUUR7jEAyeK5V++jrXouXBAN4leI5jYh+eUrimjXNAfnz
hEGLIS7NQgJpD6MAkhjCUMFAWcwh9UAHKF1WW0XlAtJfXMkz1qnkWEVk04LgEaSNX72YdpMmRNc6
JCzg0px+gUG/Wy0NTteS5m4N0XqHzBceMEJIzXZceUcB7bv9+vXrN23e3rm7b9KkKbNnzxw3PspF
2WYkHmBDJGDvrCJtdAgoiGS+kmrPgYG82kMvqE6slwQvmFcDNV+H41Uqd1HrlbKVaN5UMQIkDiJQ
1T5cEVQ1I2mQH6tW1BZ7MJAkFRjzaVvPVlC58ibBIUrHEXohIQsVpGmOQ/MKYlIjj1C9Ri2D/HK1
921P7OksqmFXGpCsKyKLqXjhxk3JimVL23Ztb2iMZsycOnP6lKbGkAAWT0Rp3+FZlFIaqdSh7z9H
AZiFmUw46AyzJ1Xn1UsBGi7cczh2EQYZDRV9ixoXiNQMVtTPq6zjFwSp5Q/K8n8BZNKA/Sq4g/Sc
B/Gq5t9MASZr64LAQ9EAXqkEAVId3Bdi7lQ4aAEaOKg6VKV7YWp26dJxoTIqDY5fqbnpNachABip
hwX9fYn3UP13lD18um3R+ijIxY7Xrtm4cvmqvt7y2LHjJ06cOHPmpFwORPAMEph0EVksmEKtAHjn
2Nswimp0s1RmR9aOYHVevRR4YbzKmvgAUXWuiOZVW0Haz6qBvBrQFmvat6sZlkw/r8QBSkhxFmaQ
EclnCuwMMMj0a7JnvDUCzVAqm8swiEFwMKhlAF4Ir8SBIDA1qhsDztn3v59eOGp5NaQbgAaPUTyc
PSYiIp7hBSziPSTQYSzeWYnChvQ727d2b966c82aNVrrCRMmzJ8/d9SoAIDzUAqG4JjFcy5IVQG8
917rysMSyVRTB6rc1fE/BL3w9IQBvBKkEoA1lhJlTEv7+AqvuObZ1dqHtSpFBrWtGfBkkPJKHABQ
1oh15d89eZVNb2oGhP7SBHteaNWpMBC1ElJVhvvKOzqVr0m3JFP9vq5MOKV6jbUO8D3tvdrWPPhu
VMScRIRJKUNpBhsh8S6NRwbYsWOIggZpRbpU8hs3b1+xfPXujt6xYyYuXLho6rTAMozOJN6cEw0x
unpWHkhHrXqsxUuMF8qrNGgw6+2kf7wCSVDZZdqdV3g19AxiqNoi2fupTIwFyJORbJxJiaQqdQwc
IKBgoA3mK3Oe/kIKlToJFqDqadecytDCYwN4xQyCkLIAAJWxnzOBUVIVrVHoSrci4CFEpIc3QaX/
PlRJxSxQVBEUhvJeIKQUuOqKUGk0olQuwwjgGR2d5TWrN27csI09RrQ0773fgtaRUT7M1FJT0Wzv
WGtFIgJfI19T97G/ZCCWbHWlBs8uczeAV5zpSA/ilc98Zf07VDV2FAPsUR2LshOpzKlMhVfwFAzD
q7RUQTCQnD7zeaWr0QSfSaxBowRRoEgG2WA0ONBbBvKhyitPaWA/CAj7V4p4MK+kcqHyrG2Uao9Y
m79R/VbKzCy/I1Xt1VrX7la4P+4wTY9MgwJRGSV7SnHbrq4Vq7fsau8MtJo/d87sWRMLORCjEqnB
AFMaEJWVIxKF+srwS4AXwSvsUVkn1ZGu2oEDxqvq1IgrPvLKPERlq/sD5lq1vKLUytIA4NJJdmV+
1T9eVUa/TF+awJn6Zq3lJjGA4XmFatuuOidR+W4WGVFhqUp5XiU0sa+41Af0Ec/Nq4wzkt6ZmoNW
D51qy6usNgoLM6AgphqvUd1UJAuz9YD3TuCJRCklCNt2x9u3daxfv767c/eYsaPmzZk9eeKoIAAE
IqmIYn+FJOr3n1Tx3IPYi3GyvtrxIuZXe2LQUtXQApR7ZtrJ0HxWtX/320iiQLUmE/Z45NXsPVQ3
zi7yWWtq1Xx3KFSj7Pr3NuCfF7ui2p9r+Pza5R4VIQbdu2zI4sHbk3IOSgGErVs7lyxd1t7eHgTR
tBnTp0yZNG5MId1bVoWIvSFHYMqiHGlwTQwCM2qFD2WYe0eD1hkxlNU9cM+DLrbSd70irdOXhFd1
vPwY7jl6b40Jq17Kcoz1G3es27B+65btY8ePmzVz+qRJ4xsLQGXRXKUFwoRSNRtmEGXZkzXpXojj
WCkVBIEMcSbAwJJoNX58HtBBPAevOFvVfAWizqtXOdh5ZbRU5mBp+bxSjFyE9o545fIV6zesU8Iz
Zk6bM2vmqFEt1iFNA0MlSEMBLKxIsTjvrYgExiiqnYjWzPr6JYZqwnIGjK/cP8JVS4Tucdaoj1d1
/J+GgL0XUkpT6ttRBE6zJx2MgVZwFuvWrV+3ZnXH7p4x46ZOnjJ98sRRuTwyIX6CMCsFTVk+dHW9
JA2nrDkY73Fwtce8sc6rOl4FkOyFBak8PANx7Il0FPZvQ4Td7d2btu5aumKDdRg7dvSivReMG2MA
OIfAQAHWJgIfBZFCqidFQVbnoeJWpdrwxpRUhKyGWAY9YMVyeIGAASsxrzzUefVqB2fJIcxwaQ54
JdrQOnHOKaUCrVWqXEOwgBXs3Nb3zDPPbN+xtbm5ae6c2ZMnTmhsDIPK6OJZdMUQrDhguWLt9dt9
1fXxOq/qeNWBwSxEQlpVEpbFi3jvAxMAYIGuZGcVrTehthAC2UTWr9+8fNmqpORbW1tnzpw1fnxr
YxMU4HwWw2F9HOl0mZoEikRBUa0PsOrBB6rFB6uL3VW8Ii29Z0edV692cH+f79lCUTrScMo4D6ON
Sle/BaThwQxWML7yvaSMrs542coVO3fu9N7PmDFt7tzZLS2mUhCdVTpfElUtPZOmUaaQbMXSDyxs
VudVHa9oDF5B4oHPW/W7xCsfSLUUHxiAzz7QAnT1xJs2bl+zZkN3T3Hi+EkzZ06fMrkpFQfxDDBS
Ad9UDFH1p4rKMGf0PPJoXpmo8+rVjufmVU2mHAauf5OTimuulCTahEaFDOzalaxdt2nzpm29vb2z
58yYNnXyxIkNRBAPEEwleISFKYtyBAB4CIE0GD5dHwNAlI2fdV7V8crFcBFqNWEcqBSwzVKzRIQE
IA0n8AzobOt0rXnNqvY1a9bu3Llj9JiW+fNmT5gwppDXBBFmTaSr+V0Vc9RzbV5Z9bBZetCrhl11
Xv2zoVarfY8IpGqIc5ryWHV0EJxDKj0qNQH4DCVAqYwNG7auWLGsp7trwoRxC+fPnThxjKJqcgpU
RRDbWqRpyiJgrogfEgHQSqPOqzpeKXiB3mqGyICMrEF7I7AwUVqKSATCMIl3EBMaxYLNmzpXr167
fdvOIAhmz5w+b96sxiYQYJ0AzhjDTFmgk0ojrGsOXcErdC24FnVevcoxLK+GiPZNyykQaqKQhkG2
EMwQy06rAFBcCZ7o7cXOHZ0rVqzo6+sLIjNz1tRZM6cV8tkO06yBtFCDTqkJz8yB6c9PqfOqjv/r
kD1i+fdQARiwpc/mOQRwbev2jpVSVSdElv2lMolsEUmzmB3DiRCRVkgcdrV3b9y4acOmLdb6qVOn
z545ddKYhrSApVQidE3/GtegM3oFs+vF8GpQ/kVF3YX7dV2yyOUBGk9ZDmRN/zmgK62V2hugu/Sc
VZv2PFD/WWbqTnvIOFVUn/ZIaalsKWAalDicHWtQln761yCVm5cXA2ZQgzLK8Fy84trcnOrNANJ8
R2ZWUJkbXrK9eoGIKA2CeAiny8oimkz1DpVibFi/feP6De27tk8YN3b69OkTJoxraMjuWPWppWqI
Q42u/ZGEQ8spvGj0P/HaBsIDq8DVxuCn2w9oqIO3FDU8r4YXjvHVlHdbJk1eRZ4lVD5JHMKcAox3
EA8dpXpJUGCwSnNgJUuOYvIeKhUEGqgBCEBZUQACYghDdFWlq3Ia1eusBHGKQn/+Mqp6T54UCwJh
CBxIa0q/6hUE0LCUxRukEjcq07Yx8HAK4ErKc0W7JpWFyZpLluDoLQyJMCvDIDOEHLpC/7gx6HYO
Wy9zWAwTpTrw30E+iefb8UvN94c9/uCUSqkJCPTVD1OdeicQkdQn4Tz6ivGq1Vs3bNzS3d09adLE
BQsWjB0bpQZgJSqqP6Mcwuyc0iFE4AVKQ2upqvNUhHtRfeLD3h+gEmgvAy3cTChMI2GrTaCAJGEK
vCZKRSA5QRBAyAGSJBSF1XhI79hrnXMCRZw2HgWwLSmtQObF8MpVFJhCSUDiETHg494oKlgo9sgp
BxERLVBKpc095RUgKuWVp/TmqBpeOUCEhZRJ8+3FxsboIUTka3klXFUU81RzlwVga02gAO0ZgCcF
BT2AV3EqaZg+UBIFl4ossR8oMlV52BZQHkGqJKHT3GaxLolNPudgEnF5MjSUt626zLrH7VT/Y16h
hkvYg1cvzJp6odZLvyjdHg0pbcK1Me+JJTEkBM/Ytq24dOnSHTu2tbS0zJg+dfbsabkoswmd8yTW
aNJKw3loDTHpuOaruSs1UP1nMvx1pac3cN5IyJqyEJhQLiaFQmjFEoFFGdKpZknJ9uTCHBBIZqsw
yLP3pHOlxCsjWmm4tNxLAvLg6MXYgcXEmjBQgPKxeAcdWs+hCUgpC7jEFwxDGCqq6boZVV6lnEmr
D+zBKxZRlPGKvFWaIMZzWjRo4MPPhm1X5VVFx0ZRprwC1qpKM1HwvmLNKwjYgwlS2S8BBjYdiFky
4pDuv/nQEoNYkPcVwWiKi1CACZk0gxxzpNQLMUueS/JgCAyswTP0Pvt59WJ5op6HBV7zLPZ8u6Jx
XXu21bheAIrQW0w2b966bt26tp3tU6dOnThx4rSpk/MRCHAMQ1AEZiHxIqJASkEpBSaIZHunqtpX
qjOSekOGOO09Uloy+DgBoMOQGaThfNlow8KKwtgC7KNIQzwReSgWcOyjUIEcu1gFBYFKlcA0QzkJ
UIYGYF4wr5xLtDEeqhTHTZEGRKynIBSovtjnIq1R1bINEuuDIG23jtIRol8bo6pIUZ10OUBEFJH2
worSRCFU+DfcM3aZHVgzPassvIiT2OgQrJwTHRJqTEQQEigAYaYHSFlF0opMOsOwcJBKpffrZDAo
clClBIUQmsuAB4VxwjqKEkZevVBznwfNiJ71FQPGt+engviCUFM3tYrhFAr20MqtfU3PN/3b95+7
B3v0mxhcOcO167Zv3bpt69atWuvpU6fNmj2zpSWqXqKpNRHTJ1hV4qBqHEk2O3kh7sTsSn0ZOlJC
nHAcKQOQsIGq6nkxACsqzV72iTWpKJcI6cgibdnpvMCBHRw/B6/2mOIyiwMgFAIQlyhxymhAx2JI
QaeiPjZWCjBRWgZQAf28qtYEyFpz5R0ByAIi0EQaYOecNqF1VoGMqU4QKz6D/iGrX9CiX0u92l9K
AlICYz0CnYqxCAkgHgoxGQFy6WQ7naamUlPkAJX2TwExAJdq6Gb9hU57KbCE3AtN8IApFL3SOlMw
HHTXnuWGopJw/jx5RRieK0PR7AXamFzT1IdsEHuqyuyhmDscxxiAc3BKK0qLRHiFLIwpDZXC5k27
1qxZ09HR0dTUNGfOnKlTx0W5tGVnr1qkkpmia8+7qlEpyHRwiJ5Pt8POOWMUEgFEQpNNWETBaWjy
Kl38tgIPnQMgiQQBQbxnq40RqLIjrYkAxR6J02EAei5/YHXBvdKamYitLSuTFyEbJ+STJ+6/65wL
Lpm08OBPfuZzIyIK4JUhpOUMKRNSJmRaS9WjqYpsE1gL0mIzmXoZMyt4UKbHRBBgz5KE/YqfNe+n
In+Z6EISx1EEYXgVMWCL5YZCyBAlDAagY60EyDEgHlpqxOFVqpSrJD1P9GuMVmJ8ygyjYRC3bVn/
yEMP33z7vT3S9M1vfWfK2MIAXg16tkM5s17M9Gq4Fjz8Q3x+O+fnZ5rWjJ9cGTWezzAtAjhQ2t1m
xovzsAylwdmsAN6jvT1Zv379li1bYuvGT5o4Z+aMcWMLgU4FIge4fGsvUgYS/zktchEBSbnY60t9
K1eu7HU+X2hMSkW2LgoKTa2jJ8+YVSikMxD2UIl1ea1BZK2sXb/mzntvX7t2bWNuxOgxI4895ogF
8xcseWpVGERz5s8cvq5c9uoHnASYwEFgnHdahzqff/Ceh/7wm1//9epbTj5rbKGBQoCEIGKdc6Aw
SMX2shabfj9zSEv2CYhFNLIcHhDBe1HE0Grztp1Nra2NOWPjUi4qVC2hfsO/Qt3+plYxq5LERVGw
a/uGT332i2HL5P/8z/8aWcg5W1RBVWmotiVoZgclhAQwCUfCpKnaEaZ9pMoczsIABwoClZbKygfq
kvP/vODIt4wcU6j0QM+7dcsLtRsHP6HBr7VIXVUvYJcDcnufFZUnMFwq/ZDfISIOwAzmqhK/UZma
fNUbaTQmjg0njp0rmFuMZcOmzYuffLS7q9jcMmra9KmTp4wb0ZBqBFgFIUCLJujqnaxS69ljTdIR
xXkX5sK2jm07dmz59Oe/tHb9tn323ufEE0/cuX3732+5rTexHzrro//v//2/lpZ8XO4r5CLY8gMP
Pva5L3+jvafnrI+c+baT3257e125+Juf//iu+x7siaMLLrpsOj1Lvcaap1Q7pol4ZjY6F9vEsTr8
yCPbVr35sqtvgQo9UCrZQo68ZxMECip2Lmd0WrFMoKSyU6npXFO6CkGYADhOmzzD+0cefWzGvHkL
Zk/NRbkh5Z6rnX32FeHqvFsbYnG72jquuebapvFzevv6CqRzATy8kCYhkNKpVK+k/QcreMAzs+fI
S9UHmPaEjOq6DRTIaVJlHwdajxk3ft7c2d09ybHHHp91QkO7wtVz6wo+J/pVjYZ7bJWj0IvwiAxo
ji/tV9INFNLpMvXH3lZmMFU/h66kOANg4YZILZg9ZeL4CavXrF+zdvMTTy3e1jZhytQJM6aNJgQq
7eeIdH+1pOd3wlmTZgXSSo+fNPGkCWMOu+j8Deu3ve3kUz/96c8kxd6FC8//9ne/8/vf/vqgQ48+
+eTXaSXgUrG3+IMf/OCxxUv+41e/fP8HTs8rRCLgZNbUsctWrnrqrmfKNnMxDwP26eGVUiBiZgBa
KcB4H2tNYZAjBnw8eeK4nEYQBBZoygcQp42xnkUrrXVai8olbMJMF1wBsY11GKRl6VI7OHE2MJFl
6KxJ+CceevBr3/7mn87/i1KmMnHKGmVaRq1isCtlUt+6Tx+FKFhnI6NtnMyfv/Dav13PuVFjRzfk
WOCLIJAiWEYIeK9JV8ipvCtpI319xa9/7ycfPuvje82YyLasSJPKIrsrPE4j6KAki0g498/nNzZF
J5xwAnGt2V/bshmUDv5CRMIsIooM6AWOVQOkwobZQliEa6zLCpOfx7EIrIcdr1j664VXDLHMyTZk
pydDm4ZGVRaV00NWJszKS+aaZ0WQVJqexYvWJmhqNPvsO3vffWc7YOO2juUr1t734BPNTS1TJ0+c
OWNSaxNEgVEOQISAqhmWANII+oHOpCxFBSyA1uTZEbQS3zIiiAzGjBnfMqrZjG7+whc/K777y1//
4Ze/8u/zFhyw/4J8z66NJ574jocXr7r8b7e+/sSjJPUNeAtvp8+add11173lXZ/csHnT4VgwLK9S
/5v3npm11qS0d+nsHWGYj61zzNqE0DqfC2OPchJnd8i5hL2JCpw9S1/u6801tLAg8RIYKpaKDflc
krgwyAMM9lA+NLq3bKNcIGnsc1/P5Zdeun1HmzKRZR8o5VkAr5RmYWMUBHAxjFFGlSzyGloR4jLC
XFqWvq+ns7GpAaJfd8IbSlU6GgPx1vsgyiH18yhdKiLIwShFMC7uufvuu59auiwq5MU7HQSSZjiQ
Ys9pQSkXO5MLnHOhCcBFG8cr1m5saB0zYcKEUA+IVKhtcNbFAAITAESqUuyLub+cYsUoyJ56rf+z
dg4sDEilRvEe86rUlKY91oX7J8pCAoYoUoPnZlnBBsaQU24SglSUqyvW7vBelMGkEgHAQqRULQuF
spiFtK5kegaZo5hAmgyoqtSdmgNTJowcM3rk6pW716zdsPip1dt2tM+cNWnK5JGFMBfDauaQlHNM
RGkJ9nRmYTQNdZJw3hmtAQ1ynJTEQdJcaYEO9Ly5043CxvVb1m/cuv+C6U888uDTy1ZOnjbnsMNe
gyxaPw5ACHIgFRl95OGHaXFqmPEqu/C4XI5yOQDlUp8Jg4svuujuu+8W71atW1e29OcLL5ozY6ot
l7y3hlAoFNp2479+/aMrLjpn4cKFXzj7/+13yCHCQNyXK+TbdnX+6bwL1q9bvWvnVpsUP/zBD530
plMAlMulth1bb7zh2jvuvv+LX//3Bx964o+//82Jxx5S3r76j+dfm4yc+K9f+drklty/fvaT++63
f9ZA4ySXy0Fsuaezo6u3F43TZk5In1F3Z8/2Xeun77Vv7Lwrdz++5Imusurss6859thASS4fiLUU
Gmbcffd9YpMjXrNf7Gjjjnj6rHG23PfUEw9cctHFv/rdn1//9vdt3bp5evNMrTQp01dKcvnCkqVL
d21aM2HChAX7HZQA2hhIAuJN69bedNeDbz7lPRPHNw7ML6+2HwFgTIDUGIZwOiwTSCuWJB3EMt8N
qiaQRWVpdeDCC1V8zgP8hMxcsxkBWdg4MwSsiECkCAIiBQIxZym92StAqn+Nd4jBrXbWIj4VuRYR
MrnBzK+UlB38DqAUkpr7kr7L2fXWbq6oZlBzDKOyRfo0SCcIsO9erfvs1eqBnbuweev2m25/XGk9
fdLYGRNaxrUaY5RzWcoXEQatKdbEr0GTkXTiTxLqUBOgFBQ8QzO3jGhuyEedHvl8BHE/+fGPe4r+
X97x7tYWrQFmD2EEOfY+Lvt8If/RD5/ZV4qDZ7MDgSiXs0kShGEun//WN7+59Oklf/nLX8J8/q67
7/nQJz+3cdOWOTOmBrkcERmDRx99+Pvf//6h8yZ+/vOf/9jHPv7go0/c/sDjk8ePNDlzz99vOvmM
T3z1m9/9yU9/Gij3+1//4pRT3nHqaWf87g/nKO+vvfqaH/7gW919iQ1ax02c1t3bs3z5sqvO+Xlf
sfTHmxd/7wc/PnT+RImtdT4ymsC5XMje3nfXHbddd8Wvfven8fMPv/HW28c0KU3+V7/61bf+/Uc/
/9O5H/ngmaVS38plz7z7w1868Ihjbz7+uKZ8CGEKwv/+/e+vvOLqj37oIyMbC9/77nf+dtOtPpp4
899vGtsUGMiatZuYgte+7jifFJO4GOZGiOC8Cy7+yyVXnHrKm/ebMf63v/7FHU+s+NN5Fx2w92wQ
oVy+766723aX3n7GmdYhUkMu9pCkybOkRRhQipRLK2sTlDICJ0hHEQjSCX0aXJeNJulKQoUnRESQ
bNCjqtuGKkGVVGkwqXOzxgTiNPFJsver1HeSsUAEgSYMVfpgQLhC/4pvZhcPwcMs2ALOwXtxzjGz
BcciVth77713iXfOiWMRIVHM7F26JRx7ZnbCIt6lwbwe7ASA9z6x5XIcQ5EKIytwXomK1m/edvGF
V8ydlHvPaW/dd9FexigA1vog0IPPjqhKeyLjOWYkATkizYLExYkgrwCov117c29fvOCQOfvsPWvt
E3etWroSpuHQI4+1FiZAqASUTkiMCRsFatyYVmGIt2ZYn4nz0DoIjNgkSZKHH3iwtaUlzOcBvOaI
Y44/4UQWHSfeBFxOSiWL9o6dJ73xDaccdyAl5Ssuv/yW2+7asnn7xLEj4e2ll1zcNGLkGR/4l3yO
2Np3nf6O3/3uN9ffeMuy5asXzpn2jne84/abr7nxtnubW0Z96KOfOOzwA0eGZRpR0AZKa6UDAFEU
uMx9wAArpebOnp476XV33HPvY+s2d3b1TWxtgY/nz58/adLEbdt3CTB20rjXHHqgiRrnLdzXaDLw
ILnr9jt/8pP/OuOMM05+61tCzQ8/cOeTi5e896NvHjGCIP7A/fcTlR89buppp54ytqUxFIvEXnPj
zd//wY9PeedpH//4x3PUly9Ev7zo3Vdce92COZ9qCgXKLF3yTNA0avyUGaFB0F+hB7U+SwCKFEN5
ESJSBGYIIwhgWREZQBFJNnEhALBZhTpFJNkrZXm7lc524EMb6ASrvjd4DbkaH1rhSXbESkhradA4
W5lXOp+58ZyDc965hBki4i2LiPfeOeecSwkjItZaEUnLvaezCWYW8c6XRZhZvPfi0leISLEcAyAo
rQOtAxUYpRQRBUFALEYFWpMC5UJjTMgS5goFxxx7zjW0BmHDuo07ArTvs9e+B+41dvr06cooBkiG
ldeuDKoqsS4IjE5XLDkEQYVZvZUHH3j4uutuDXRwyimvH92qVizu7ul08ERBLgiQlJN8pECUJIkO
cwAlDhrOaPg4Gd4fKNnAz8xRPj9l8uRz/3zBiA9/+PNf+NLsvRb965e/mi8UgkCDEh0GgcHRRx95
wnEHph3s8ccff/Otd65Yserwgxcuvv/Bc8+99P2f+nKUJ88wRGMnjPvkJz72yS/+4N++94Prrjh/
xIjJI1salcJ7znj/rJmj5s18YwNi9G3u7GhnUh7kGGFNDhyxwMi4KRPHTWp++8lvvfu75yxdvmrh
9IMBvP1d7161futhb3wTAPjk7zfe6Ly89ZTTGiJDsNdfcfW7zvjAl7/zoy984dOhdhC21pLS73zX
6Y4Btts2bLr1jvs/8JGPj21pge8F5Lrrrnvnuz/8sc988Uc/+g5sDMMHH3rw7AULzz3vgrM/eRaC
MN6x46orrz362FNmTm1xXgwlWoUDgz8yjjlhRSCi1NmlFXy6iKEq6w4Dl3xJUaVESbqvSoidA0va
vrNen1mYOR0Q0vbtvXhvmcE1yIYI59KqP865tN1XyeC990KlciJKpc6JtGWnM+0gMEoprXX6miIt
Yaw0jA5NoNLX0ESkpMmMICWKjNJQZLQhglbkC7lQEZRSSpEhaJ0O2lnmSEpjqTHUyIMkSzdmBjuE
IVK3jHPY3SlLlq1cu+HpsePHn/Gu104YA8UIFUplGwRBqBGGRgTWuigcuqmHoQFYvCPnTRhZwdV/
u/zpVcvi3R1rl67Yb/9DfvW7jx9x4uuc7Y37eokB6CDMCRBFIdhBkdJZP6UUjFIAmyg/LK/IGDB7
G+swBOiYI4+68LwLLr7wL7vauz7+ubMPOfZwn7oMNcdxzEAYZkNfEOZKvb0KyOVySYIVy54eUUBj
8wilwR6aBHFpr/kLANqwcbNj2FKv0aqQ0wxJKmuN0FQoFKIoYiHvgBBJIprIGAWdRvY5kGttbQaB
QaXYNUZ63ZIV3d3d02bMZgDs1q5eZXKN02fOIsAW+6666iqjc29689u0BtiD/MqVKwuNDWPGjjUK
EF7y1JPlPjdp6hwN1hqw/oK/XOzYvO4NJwUE0oIk6S4W23d3Fhpak3IZOdq4cUvbrs63HngQA6RE
U60FNcAiZIbSIIKNIQZeEMdZ42BmZnhvneOUDyI+SRyzS9/v5wl82SYpH6qDQDpuJEmSdoLM7B07
b71jFm+MISKttalAa01ESmki0oEKc/0kUQpRoBVEKVVlUcquMAqqjKr5CFnkGvWXp6uOEP1VIKt/
pMuryCqSDDLPqhF+tS4XrRkQSquLaWgND1iPYoxNm3asXLY8Tvr2WzRr7ryZDfl0ZVEsQ6nMJegc
K6XCsLYUW20rZ+s50IqoAJU4hics2mfBCSe9sXvr7qnv/8j40SPnL1rQw+WmgBpyUT4ycGFfX1/M
MAosSgsbTc6XAp0HwXomYaPNs4xXTICOIrZWGfOe951xxBGv+f73v3/p5Zdfcc11+x/9xl/95r8P
XTgJkDAXOYZLPCoemzBSWnFfX18Yoq2traeI9o7dlOYUaIUwGNU6sqGlubdU7u0tjWpuVOCk7I0J
dbp2zF4Fplwux329YAlDOEYUkLO+krFhoQSeJ02aBOe2bt3cEB20e+fOP15w4fs++NHRzUEA9Oxo
u/ivl73xLR9dMHekFn/936694C+Xfv3ffrBwwVRvAWPvu+Xm626963VvPm32nIkaAMdXX3HFiLFj
3nbKO2LnCga33XTjjdddf9p7P3r88YeTh9EaFN7/yJO7d+0+4sjjx45qhrKXX3WdV+GJJ56oAEPK
u1iboeuyhVp5YM3qDcuWrSiW4jDMkTbGGKVCEKVN1eh0aUKBKAwCEKXvRKFRuqCVIqVMpIlEKVPb
vokoCKAUtILW/Qbis0XnDtmZAmqg+l9Ne6iRBKyZa1G2Xl7rdlAinkhXU2Nq10KN1v3/SXVfnCZz
pSOVTmebgIBZWJNOlxcIyglWr9myZMmyJHbTpk859pjDR7WGAJgTg4QUkTIM0tBZ0qRRzx4AG2iV
6UiBrHgozJo548RjTjCALyMKkdgkHxrAzZw3b+yUiauXtz+9+JHT33KodcgZJQyCKAXv07GX0trN
Zrj7TkoJM3unwyCJ4zCKps+f+9VvfmXqlNZ///Gvn7jvvhv+duOBs8/UIZeTkg7AXhtAAdY7YxLv
JIgMA/l8Q6ixbvPG7jLG5cgWkyBSwlwslfaeMrFxRN7H3QYmp6lcLmaPVmkUrcnlC2FISWIBDxhx
JoD30EbBaCnHFIRR2ABFtthL3j3++OP50VOmzZsl5T6Tw/otO7bslvfsM18DsKXFjz2OID9zwd4A
CgHDFv9+4w3dSTB54cFRgEAcunevXrl03Phxo8Y1KgPv/M6t26zlufNmBRqG2fd268YR9z/2DGI5
eP/9NJWRFJ9etW7MtFkzZ89IbTWtg7SV1GRt1GSVexk3ZnQhF1lrjQmCICAiY4wQGaVI60Br0jrQ
SgiBHjpG8H8bw8b+0BB/V5hFe2yrwQCREBNIBvniK559ydKoKPV4epdAkVaKmRVBERwUUa6YZPUZ
OrqSZcuWbd++nVhec9j+E8eNy+WQLnVFKgS4Ks1Be4yWFVm1yqS3soQFknTBlMWK1gC45AOAGDqA
TWBMqODE+2Bky6x95t+//NaNK57QAJk0ql4ByrokDGCtEFFPsa+Qbxx2+d9aS0rFNgEQ2+Tn//nz
rdu2Tp89++v//u01q58ZN2XyBRecl67JRPmGxCIX5FhQTqC19t5pjSSJAZz89tNaWnIP3nffiuVr
AQT5Aqzfum2HuOTd7z6dAG2MCcJSImEYVhKeCEHkBWLLTbkgdml5NABChMRKOS5TrsBdfTNmz25s
bNi1fcviRx958snFn/rCpx1QyIUoFf98wcXNIxtOeO1xPV1lWPvkk0/qqDB1+gwRuLh4xR9+/7dr
r0e+5Q1vPtkAKPc+9cgjK1ZsfOdppyiNne1d2kRt23dEClOnTiag3N2p84Wnlyz54Y9+euDRR3/8
rA9Dc9u2TTfc+vd3n3Gmta5tVxkAW1u5f0NQwGhqaW6YNHH8tKmTp04ZP37cqDGjW0ePGjFmZFNr
S0NLU66hEBQiFRik62BpINyg1//tH3ohP9mVUuWninQQkizLWGXhuSpNsO33SRIAdj7xbAHWxmgV
CJMwKYqASCTwQJzg8SeWX3jRNX+/5daRLa1vedMb3vn2E6dMGJvPZTkhgapkofCg8LQaLtcsZw+A
sCuVQVBB4Bie0VxohINNQITUCvCxYw9VaPrCl78ybnzrdVf+9cq/Xq4E3nO5nJRjGwahc6wULrnk
knvuvq9frmBIeO8L+UI5LhPRrbfe+uUvf2Xnth1AyIzGptxb3nxSQ6EBUFaMY/R0d4QEY0Cgvr6y
9WBvAYycMOH8iy5JSr1nnnH64088XS7Hq1et++Z3vnfWh878wHveGSiwl+6iFYW+rt3pAoVNPBxG
jxpT6um+4vLLzv/zpbfeerd3DnGiFIKAoqiQlGPV0pLP51tamy655KJbbr3905/5jAa8B4BSOb71
9jvGjh370AP3X3bpJTDBIa85otTb/dvf/fqG6278zGc+k29uhQmPPOqovRZOIAC5/B133tNZxMTx
E/74+3M3b9wEkZPe/JbG5tzDDz4EIDdixO033fy2t73t1Heccs0Vlzc3KZC69K+X9RXjjva2P5/z
+67OXYGCGiyN1+93TwNWACiF6nqlHmqxMg1rwCsDXKO9XkOw1AVDBAFBEZSq/HibOirYc5z4XiGr
DSmlvbBAeShPhkzoGDt2+eXLtv3lwqvvuP3WKAxOfcfbTn/nG+fNmQoWFoQhAfBeKtYmi3j1AqPE
RKTGytBdXT1hSNu3byeNMAchxBbC0MakHr/99j/w6quvnjBhwrtOP/1rX/v6pk2bcrkwigLvZd26
dd/4xjecc29844nWOv3tb397z8MB0FrHcUwKYRAqrS644IKrr75OhA37q665YXdv/LnPfnrS+JHb
Nq4779zz73/ocdFm1ry9p06avGzJkxec+6f1GzePGD1m0cJFY8a0Thg7tr27+MADD65asbzU13vj
TTd5z5/87OdnTp1o4/i+u+8855xztuzsKrSMnDl7wYTRzaEmwHZ29Fx70x133XlPlM+9/W1vmTC6
BVqLIyiK2UVhhDgW0b/50/lxEn/lS5+dNnOWJwoUNLh79+4/n/fnVWs2zlm49+mnnzZm1IjOjvYb
b7v7kfvvW7V65XFHv+aIQw/52a9+c8wbT33DG44KGIGz99116533Phprs9/+B732uGMM3JiWpp6e
4h33P9zY1Nq2cf31119rcrmzv/y1WTPGi4Ph8iMPPXzz3+9KGCe/49RDDtpPey/wqjb/sqbrrCbP
eu+Zszey3PCB2wzbs/5fhPTnOvSrXhDSkNDay0f2nspuT6oto9Nwi7J1WkdSSU51Hjvb7NPPrFj8
1FMzZk5esGDO7JlTwgCS5hAYEgEzC1ip1HAVFiZiIryw/Og0gMTo9ra2W/5+8znnntvR0Zu4ZM7c
uYV8cyGfU1TJn1Qo9/aYKDd27ORcrvDAAw/cc889mzdvjuOkrW3Xgw8++Ne//tUY84EPfKChoSAy
dJ4IA/Dea6299wCsizdt2tTW1sbOl/p6R40ZO2evA6JcwOVy+46tq1ctHzFydGfRjxg5euLY0Tu2
bix2teeifHvRTZgwYdG8abZYCgojNm9v27BhQ2dn5+wZ02fOmBYEgbNxsad77dq11loV5nd19U2e
On361EmhSgLt4GXVmp29CSZMmTayJQhsQprEMoVRQtBgzaWdW7Z+5PNf/9Z3v7v37GnWWo4ajUYE
hitv3rRpV2f3nL0OCEMdcAKS9Rt37uzYPXfWtJaG6Lvf+NoPf/bLq+9+8rBDF0aCEBbF9qXLVgbj
Zk2aMgmMkJ0hiyTeuDt+cvFToxvCKZMnTJk508NYB2HJq96kr2/Jig2jJ0wdN2WCF6AcF3JRjUbA
oAY4RL6qDBXY8MqCZHmnUEPovahKEkBNtBRZTsNOKwIYabRHOvBt2tS5Yvma9o7dzc3N8+bPnTm9
GWlsStouJRv2FVhEKtJoqYdDIKJIPXuoQ82dryRQAEm53N6+Y9nK5blCVGhsat/VMWJEy+RJM8eN
G52WWWHvQU7BQgdAECfMzI899thDDz20cePGMAz333//17zmNVOmTEmjXrSmYXkFwFobBGkpF5da
jIlNAh2yCHQQJ9ZAwiATdbGi0kVG9i511aZqE2JjoxWUBlTsoTWsQ86AwHAJtGbrVJiXSq47AHir
dZq7FsVWKCQFGGG4BCCYKCEkjhuldNttty3fsP09731fa2MeQNkj0HBxKQoDMFvPJsyVyqVCLlV6
CYpxOYAPw+gDZ5xxyx333v7w4okTRuWASDkkvSDlwhFFj0gjgCgfQ5FQxFmqIlsfKx2AjAJIbJqM
z6IsoBXQH4Q2RAZ7Nc6oOnCloUaVmN6hxSH+70Nqrray7DRg4S6jVrZELWVXDMJQIShbVqS0AYCy
BXus37ht6TMrE2dnz545Y/aMEY1kqBL64QUDFzEEPm1uaY1WpE583tMUf9aTF0nKNsqFIPZs05U6
FvFeAhMh22Ea8+JIibPWBIVSOcnlQmY457q7u5l51KhRzrkoCgA4x8YMr8fE7JRS1trUkxvHcRiG
RKknFsVSbyFfyMJ5PaeTTucTo42zPggCESQuCYOQwM5aY0ycOBNFFUMBRpwrl0wuBxDIWMfGqCRx
AMLQEJyPE60UTM6lSSbWKi0Ate1s29oTT58+/dJz/zvQOPPDH2coBVhnAxNY68NA2zgJIpM9VzDE
Jy7RJlCkCLJh/YbDXnPssa97/e/POSc0CAGOizrUIFVmTUppgISVjclohiGlCEjKcRilEehKRAge
zF6gTShZ+KbBMCIKg55l+kcNwV4xLBrqemq8+dmv2qTjmmxUJiFYobSlptF7scW6tbtWrVq7e/fu
eQvmTp8xYURzLjRppVYJFBlA2GtSmc/QexExpn/WysymslwkIkRDr3MMp2+RnmbH7o6RI1sYjrLZ
oWIBkCboQhgiPp0MW89Gm3RRPoqClHip3SGCnp7eESMak8QNvy5MBCAdrwBEUeScM8ak4QKFfMGz
J0rLKSmlFHsbaFMul3O5ApCucIfMDqRNkMYiRUmV/elJ53JgFhZPMMY466PQpJ6i2HIU5SAePoaO
RCrTER/fcMMN19x+/6GHH+a6Os/8wHsAduyMCrUJCAiMAqBMwA5Kk3OxCQLP0CZQRMyJBi1dunR7
W/uCvfeLDNiDNHR6LGijKNVaUgwdRGCnNKx3RpkwFwHsrNVak1LsRWmjRUG8MAday9Dxqqi2ACBd
r6RB93lIR8UrhmnDJj4NEEQTpIJgBKBskQsgQEdnsmzpyq1bdjLLoQcdOG366DCfMtIppCUhFYFS
mTTmNK0j/dspZQBWyijFgBLxImmXOPyZDkWtdN1p5MiRABOUgL2wJihSLP0xzcZo7326YCgCY1S6
MpaaG9UF8REjGuPYRlHwLLzqN15TpL1CZTVQGVXRnEjT0VQAQS4qABAgCNPLVtX4OAGCqnFEFUUK
rUlnFnEQ6GoAZxiktW89tErzdoXJ28Qo7Nq1c+3ata9/w0kf/dRHXFJ03pGiijHAmamlSAHecUpp
LxxQENvi+jWr/3rxJQ889Ohe++y3ZMmSm2687cTXHQ9NzKxUINVY8VT3B1npi0CbyjCrTBBAGMJK
6yzTEZT6KoZ18abXP7yv6hVDoT1RNT9q/6bscXP2dr9P3jOgUI6x5Om1K1esNoFauHD+QQcsyuUq
dylrUgaUajcxIVNk7NfBoKqx1y/kRqSf/S4Od5N1f6pyZkxWfbRVb7k2qkrp2qc8aJdaAUAuCoDn
1rsdLM3TP7rXpOsCA4QRK9twv8DVYOHYIQ/Rrx6a5QdKpnghaQylK5MhZpQkMgZcTqJQSaaEEWhQ
xb5XLGm5Tk4NhHJiw9AocBwXoyhnHbPJAzCArnhoKvOEfq9DRbV34FVnbmWkKhoDqrv3K8X+06A6
La5wx7MVSePsNQOeudqjtHcU29o7nnj8yaam5smTpk6fPq2lGQrwWRqIJwGgSKo0dQCqMhj9eGlv
cRrPXWPBVppjKs1So6fyQvb6nJO85+O13HOaXtVIyqhVybZGpqRJSqAybVooiAMAUgO0JGsaKQHs
vVIK4pkzK0IHgVKSpjgMEhdLOxWibLIcBAGzV4qiqADAGJUuuFBWFWO4kOeh1BtEgfwQg5Oo5ymd
MvguvZJVyEEMclAEglgvirQOBMqysBOlsyzGxKGjo7Rq5dp169eMHj1ywfw5M6aPr95Ao/pXkEGV
bksUEGQ36X+zrxoYK5LJHCE7cP+beC61jME35n95CTJrOmkPrwGIS6chUqlgW3kTIONrWhkJQAO0
0LxPtCGAWAwDmmBdHJpg0H1BxZKuTmnSM3E+qSj3KytKRIJKvrZjr5WuagulVgENdSHIzgqVLqn2
7xd5c/437///NhjwPikzVBBGgIqtY6ggyGQSOnbHS55ZumnTlqbG5r322nvmzJZq6qcXy06UMsFg
EzkVka4sqe/ZkF9Smg3T+muVg4EXPmq9aF4NVMAkDNNK+nlVEVXkQbzqf5/MIKsy1cWmVM0zzUry
ZaMNwTjHpNOOshaq/7ipWnXmPjLV7ielUCUFRgkyf46qhOFUhslBkvZptbWquiAAM4Bj/WpQz3OE
3/OcX4ngyvKRYoFQZmfEFkph1aqNzyxZGsfxrFmz9tprUVMT2CEwXE76RJCPmiodHrQeZufEmYL0
y3Bd1T9ejBz3C+dVf4tPTbhh9WtTVedqG80mJxX9vdQORMar7ALSjFiqaHd6MFIlE1FxYsMoYDgI
axh4YSVVoQjAgVTlQIzUbtRaoLwXo7KqMtVJFPkEQqKjGlMzk6bZk1cACBYgiKlIVYMyE7FGXfAF
jD+vEl4JEDsbmEywnhScx8aNO1atWrVj+87Zs2fPXzCvtTWCh/cIAxAhLvcUcjlAey/MMGagv2FA
Z1adu764ycjzxGB7b+D7tc/0Bez/BfKq4vMRSn01QXXVT8hxFk1sMi35TCe4XzahpnBt1rHVnnVV
5qDKKwdGpl6rQEicZSWBUhXhSxHS/byCElKcqf6yd06b0Gf67x4ChmaBFckZIi6DCBQlqao+e5PR
nCp13FVVzk5lvAIkEKpqtaebZ4rTqBz3uWzCPeNxXxm8GrKdCMhVoiU2b+pYtmxFR0fHhPGT5syd
NWliE5DKF1fqEbNl58MgB6kEmlA6oWIWT1TpYAdqGNbIBWQYZvR6cQML17TBZ+EVnje9M7y4iUHN
JQ/55tCXXpHgq/EN7pn7MDAdof9zZg5M4AGG0+lqHIA0FCgN+UcW+p9CmzBLec4eVvbcUstRnCMT
pf8rpFFraZ/RP61KnR5qj1MbIlrnlYQhpuM0wElU8+4QG9OgfQnQU8SqVWuWL1+uSS1atGjOnGm5
KHu4qYq4SqteKCAMfQJd0XfzPiES0qQycQ4BwP9Xpp17KuO/ALwoO3DQbKryjlRzjYb2N3O/Vv2e
+xvmUBjkjcve2WPsrnwgNVbls51+5fxrjv7sj7P/04FnVTVfn+O4LxX2rKM1QOZfhvhCdnL9llX6
thIQe6TxQf2xSFK5LkqDd1K5O4HSqdwN0sVQwa6OeNuOHYuffirK56ZMnjRnzpyWJpMGExk14C4M
cWf67zsPdb4vwrv9P7QD1bNu8A/gVR0vK14wryobVVCpoOF9qsnT/1WBCLRiYVfNqhcIewgpRdox
fCUzuKszWbZy1cqVKydMGjtv/tzpU8ekWyuCBjx7M8Cf+rIPPv9o1Hn1CkMtr4YtSNM/+6+uYlfq
tlTAAqXS8jaSie9CAcwSszijQoEWkLBWKlsuJYWeHnlqydK1a9fmcrlFixbNmzchsQgDAHAWRAhN
Wp1HBlbLq/Oqjv/beOG8SlOYdbYYMGhDcQCnqqAQShVpU+cSYFgggKZMAWrF8s1PL30mjkszZ81Y
uHBhS3NQPZxzCA2I4DwrsNGGXi0+zxeHOq9eYXgBq/7ZpjzYrS+VOTBXQ5AYnAiXWQXQDRbwDgDS
6NGN6zqeemZJb2/31KlTZ8+ZNWZMQ+3RnRWjSFdk3VOdahpcG7zOqzr+b+OF8wo1LmPJvLBValX3
5WNoAZmSNRSAgB074sVPPrl9+9bJkycvXDh//ISmVJeCCCatxQTvxQeUU6latYjSqKSADEKdV3W8
mjFEi/feE+lUqN06IEBfGatXblvyzFPeJ4v2nr9wwZxclNXRIUhFfinN28UgSa9U1EQNDqCo86qO
Vz9YkFaoJYZKCyoB6O7ibds7Hn7sSa31tOlTFi2a3dgAAI4RZEsJHkBFnjANUc04lep2GF2jzUl1
f2AdrxxIVZplUFwwO6VUlstc+YwZisDeK6OR+v7AihRXavKksSNO0L6rvGL5mrVr144Z2zpv7qxZ
syZQmicLVgoQr7LCQYqE+vM3pRozMRz+6RiVos6rVxhSXg2lT8cARIiZ0yS/tJKO1iQizCANYZJK
1as0d7uzq7x8xar16zcEUX7Ron3mzRpDlWoiIizwqagEpZEokv1Zyb8BUOfV0Kjz6pWGIRwXlRAK
SSuPUG2unvcgAqlM4d0EoQBpXcyVq9qeeeaZYrk0ddrkuQvmjGrJKcCABRYgU1XSlIFJvxh4AsOS
ag9GvaAEplc46rx6pWEYXjEzoLJUJgFzKuRcSRmrbOoFa9ZtXbF8dVvb7ukzZsybN2/M2Igqac8E
F4hXSKtvKYJyjhVV5BQGcKla0H04SYk6r+p4BWFQfauh0hw8gznLCCUFB3iP7dt2PbX4mba29mnT
Zuy9916jRoXpwMYCZtE6yzLQWQizSKpZWeuGyCjh+gVukWb1miHPDtVvyJ5vvcpR59UrDQPaaL8F
mOr8pOXqlMk2Y4IDekp27ZqNa1evZ4+5c+bMnDm1kEOq/CHCIE4VnlmYnaTlpLN66xUOeJ8WSkdV
w0z6VTiDQZnqtajzqo5XCPqLKGa8qrxRCXylzK+we3e5bXfXfQ8/YaJw6tSp8+fObBmR6TeoSpKO
sENaIrsim1Wb6eOcI5JUh0gGJjjVaHH2n1SKPXLqaiM/8E/iyfif5F+9IOyZlzEMKjJPFUmmqqIT
E9AvzUODt8eAPQ98hAMiDwZOOGo+rUq3Us28f+A+B7SJgYn6wAuPiBvKanquYIVKPyhZJhtJJRSd
Ml0eCGP37uKK5atWrVkzcsyk2XPnzJ41kiq3VAHeu1CrTMYxs/BS/z1Lut6rhIiMUVIpK4kskGKo
WRM9y+n+k4KE9xivam7TEA++tu/plyuqlVVBbS6W9MtXQGC4qsoE1GQu1dCAAUJCECCqbCgKDKcg
xAEEUJzlR1ZOxleUdCpNM1ufoWrRM4IoBpik0pVQduUpi5x4VlqgNGAsQPAmy/6tyiMLw3tvgkhE
QFQ7syHw8+HVoPvJA1U0FJj6lWJRUZpS6ZVmZ1vpHQRIHJQCKbiK8313p336mSXr1qwdMWLEor33
mjl9YjUVKjXqahUcB5wWDTFPQ/+TGnxd/3SKbi8QL8V4NcBTNOj3c4AHPagKT2SgvETN5gOPmPWz
KiUJV6tVPK+UbMXgKvVJaYF4eAhMtegF4LwLFDnnvLdhGJogADjT3/0fQw12O6jKZaZmnhJmquin
pSmDnOoFCDygTDbGdvfIiuWr1q5fpzT23Xffo47YH5WQWs3VhafhT7gmiXuocxzmG3UMj4G82uNu
DbKeMz1aGSisV/NvZQTo/zfrJasaov37VgP+HXzoSmH5mi9Sup+0w5ZUfKYaVMMMUfBpXOiA/fU7
shSgBoy0acMmBikIFCkC6XShU0gJgUDKCMEEmRo2gDiOoyg//Kz02Sg9+CqlYutWPhNS6SDmxSvS
Kh1tRAAmckorQeAAFmgFBsoxNm3evnHjxi1btkyZMmXe/LnjxoxIOwsROOdN8GzSynX8L2GgHThM
LzTYnVOjGCxgqpnzeLDK+sdaXj1vZBoTnIABFfaL0lT1kgwEEAeCkGFAZ8kOTvoT+MyANIV+AbNU
KHhQRn1qeinpn4x5OMvM0Eab0AOJZQ0hsDGKiFJ93EHCMoP2/AKut1rmhrIrrRqCWf0ZgVai4QHH
jNiHJlAANm9pX7JkaVdX1/iJE6ZPnTZ16mhdvYVWgqBy41/pdRVemahONp5to9pRq3/I2kOKAACg
uBoI8+LOqDINqFbnleoABSWpsytLuEONUEwakF1p2lRhUyX7qJ82VSJU/MjZdXlkyzWKEJBGVpBa
CBQoBRC0d84Y0jqlVrbDQSPwc0D2/Dc1AF12uWmyBVBOWKWKlcQewjCAgYJWKJaxdt36FStWWGvn
zJ0zd/ashgajAWdhFIwGmdQJk9bEqDPqZUBlvHoeN3+A+0sYmdECnc56Ux1MAJV3KuND/3eH6tH7
G31FYFCB2IEBpaFIKoOVAFCOlAbIx4DyOvBAUJU6oWqNM1Vxk/UraQlQVail9O/Kt3x6LKmMlhLH
UgI4QgSVc1qXBeI4Hyiwd0mcy4WVq1CDb8vzv4kD7gDXuCBVv1FNiJ0XgtLaA11dye7dnY888hgR
TZowfsHC+aNac2knY6iqcAr2Fp5VEFSsBVWfDP3j8ZxiorVZ3+inRGUtokKIzEGn+j99NhWbZ41o
YQBUMcz65bNFqrw0/aJClcOxglSPn7ZUVXEYqtS4UgO/RZUEPKkWqkijDyBhEGV6W+JLidYhRCvP
CJVmNahTUFQzkuOF2r3kJKuaEWZy5FK9e+SdKDGkwUB3F5auWL9m9cqWxoZFixbNnjkGgPMINRTB
WhcGxrM1Kq0tqtnGigxMfXL18uB/5A/ccx5V6XarRtyLhhpquaT2jeq8MFV4HqC4VskyHybqe2Dd
kP5zZYF3CDSDt2zf9OSd9z788FMbupMvfOVrC2ZPkjTJPA3+EXlB06hnAVdOQyHLHKxGu5JBXxcv
XbZq1Zp1QRQu2Gv+Ge95swHYQTyURkBpQUEJDQiZxLwwc1q8K/Xm1JeTXg48C6/6BTGrwvTWxkEQ
xTYxRilSRPCWPXltdBoIAwcdKAEl3gUgrXVaTJX7ddKRJEkYhunsP0mc1lprZEXrmCFeaS1ekQYL
i4hRWhgkDqwsTKDhin0f+9jH+vSIX//u9yqyAWmuLGh5KyZgQIS1d9YEgTCL9gpUjF0uygHZUlhi
bWgKEFhG5jMjSUW6oFU+3zR58uSzPvLJGfsfOWXqJAGE4dhllRKeww3AIgQw9SvzcSUzl5RSaU1U
IgIMQQuEYS0ShVAQeEFvH1YsW7954xbP8fx5s09754lh2C+KqU3FZ1LV8O73JilSSqvKyp6qG4Ev
D55tvBpU3845FwSB9zYMQg/pKRZDpXO5HAQsSJyLAq0M9fX15Qr5QEfwvlwu53K5OI6jKCiVykSk
tA7DMEnKmowTF4QhkBlg5XI5lwsh3NvX29DQwoDzSc4Ydp6EvbAOA4lFG+ro6rzsiit8w/hv7tgx
cvpYnyTeh2GEUllyefKeRdjo0LE1AGmUyyXPki809/SUG5siFycmisIgjPuKUaEQKZRjpxUoSVQQ
wmibxKObR7uJk0wQHXzwwVEIAEQwxoh3z7EOlNqxJJUABVRftc404lWlJF85tkwqDLUg8tAC44DN
m3evXrVh06Zt0yZPmj9v3ymTG3VlujjU2DNoPRoYaD/XafWywAw1K6hYRkQiopTybIlIK3i2WutS
XDZhrqHQoMCluFfrSJhyoSnH5XxkGhry1iFJkoZCqDUxJI7jKFL5fORZW0app6u5uQFMsXUOWmvS
NtZEJpdz7AmusaGxXIYomDAAHImQCTUZxxIYUkBTc+uNf78t1iPGjRnvbAKRIA8PCBJIaHQIUUII
whDEzhXzOe2cfPOb3zvxpLccefg+FAQArLNhLscC530+MhqZOebK5agQivAVV13b2dNzwutfm2pM
awEN1hkaVKYLyDoj2XMzQHn2qWA5MdKKZSYKUiEyFuxqk6efeWbz5s3jxo3ae9Hc1x+/X+qKcM5a
L6E2gRmoydc/E6s9GTXgEfbHoNTxD8Ww41Ucx2lN4SAI0oGLlAJ7x6KMsaVyvpAr2TiKCgRiJ+wl
F+W6ejoLhUJgQo3AOQdFpFTTiEZb6jQ69EGjIjQ3N/m4rMMwCiNHYIECpY5JhrLlchSpKDKekDgL
5QNjfFyiqAEKEeBsKdc04vCjju3zKqdhJLAl64Fi4pvykXhLXqDDRLLAUq0J8LfefOuDDz121sc+
LUjlHFRgAhERtpHRAm8tAm2sTUwuJEBYlixdEeQa99tvv9Q2TANPKwP4YGdgf3gXDSqEVhurqtLa
z6k/xTESgShYjw3r2pctWRGX7b4LF86fP6WhASLiXFkJB0EQGQMoZvbeB5mjb09VfqAmZKWOlxeV
QuIABjaHKIoAeLYGymhTKhY3btxYaGgaPXGiUSqKFMA9paQ35pGFnFbS2d6xZsPGWXvtTTqE90qJ
CJWcf+Thh+FLxx1x4M5t29pdNH7CpEZlA0Wb16wpsxo/a45LJIwUF4sPP7Nk3wP2byg07Grv2Nnm
W0a2to4KlfLw5W1btvZR04yZk9t3blmzermVcPWGrYceccycaeNtb2/QmHcAaXX/A/cb5v332otV
snb77nGTxwdUXr/qmQv+8Nvf/fGCg449eeXqVeNGLYC3QdCsNaBo6Yolmzeta2psPeigY4wBmdBz
YuB37Wy79PJrTz39vWNHjWKBUWn0kieiNAmAaM8WzBCuEq8a0FetFaBU/3DHQLFkd7Z3P/zoSiE1
buyIo47af/zoPABvE+21Vho6ny0Wi8S2RIZMYCSroZztMvu9R13JoeMA6/hHYdjxqq+vr1Ao5KJc
YpOOXe0PPvjgpZdeOmP2nK9887siLlAezl3y16smTJl68muPMso/8chD3/z+D779s98cdei+BhYu
tpz/84V/efzxx0bktCq233bHnTtd/qc/+2lPR8e9t99y4403qmjEv/3sv5sKhGL5vnvv/uaPf/mp
z3125tSRt9xy6x13PnXmBz/49lNPTLPyfvWr/9zYFf72t7/cunHN3bff8tcb7s41jXnN0ceLR9AQ
wSUlFZx3/l+WP/648XH3CSe0d3Zdc9f9P/zpjyeObrrnnvvuvP1ujrnYV7ruhuv222vC2FGjwHAO
F1523oplT/Z07Ozujdes3nnKO0/PFQDW4os7tm21jsaOmxpoePaaNCmIT8t1V1zzVaR1MAYUSs7G
eEhFa48zp7dlMKNc5lWr1j719NIoHHXQwQfMntWoAefjSCsTENIwWwG8OGEoCcOw6uVErXVXW3tX
+qMA63GxLzNYZNCPiO//4SSJ+7o6dz3+2ENve+tJTc0jnlm/2YpIcevtN1xqxkz7+s//xOJFelY9
9dB+++3zhe/8ok9E+nYsvf/Ggw4+9N9//useLyz2g6edWAC+/ZOf94m079r+2L23nXn623NhdNmN
95VExJWfvv/OqdNmv/M9Z65c9cwVV15SGDHujSef0eclsT3J7lVf/uyHw+bptz+wXLhr06oH8yNa
3/buD/V6YRGJ259+7K75Bx780bO/Ya2Ik//8zreaDE478wM7SqWySFzu/fh7Th/f2Lh2y+4+EZY+
kfJtNz84bfLen/jsJ9t2rxfZuXTJfVFh1Ec/9a1eL4mwSNfXvvypXGHsA4+tsSwsnsWLWOfLIp7F
pzfKVe8Yi7AXtsJWxDOzY+85+zT2UozZisQiO7vsfY8vu/DyGy+5+u+PL93UWRJmsYkUSzbd2Dou
xeXEWeudpKg+GC/C4kSsiKscvR+Dn2L1IdbxMgA84PH0M8pay8zOJSI2LnYJly//y5+MxrW33tdl
/a4tT5/1gVMQjf7g5//dsRXXaXt3fuc7335w6YYeLw/fcfPU1tzPfvGrkogVKce9H3rvySNHBI8u
XV4UsdYKJ3def1UA/OiXf+qyIj4RV/7Nb8695PLrRWy51P3GE980e/ai1Zt2OPHC7bs2r/ji13+2
dkuf+N2XnvNjqODcy6+3IiL2gTtvasjRRz//xbKIsEjZ/fy73w0I5152aZ+ISHnb+pXjm1rf964P
9HrpFRHpufX6KyI9+l8+eHbRJSw9wtttqW3/g44aOWGvFZt2OZG4a/OiWRNPeNO7O50kIizeeyti
nUtEvGM/sBuq3Dq2wl5EnJfYi+Ws9ZecdJf8vY88feFlfzv/0r898tTqzpLEIiUWK+JdIhynBGAv
tYz14pidpNdlRawIZ3+6WlanGJpUdV69PDDcPwGvWDKkAKWNKluOTADxoSL4ZHxTFHq0t+1WRt32
8ONT5y4YN2q57+qCGNHRqg3rPdv5U0c2KPzhz1dLw+S3nvoOQFAuRmGwduvu1gkzpk0Yqzx7ZZSg
qRCFQNzbbgw8c09398YtW4957eshxkBNaFSryx3WIxZVQP6eex8aO3bElIkF+OTpxc9ETY0L58/R
nEDRRVff1ucbz3jneyIWSBlGPblifdAyae78vQllcPuWdUu299gJcw8iBfIWyl17+WVO3BvecpLW
gcBSrCWRvr4eE4lNihqtm9duaG/rOObUhaJTgyoVz+M0JlAPNLAkW41QIDArnxWqhGUogjC2bN29
ctWKrVu3Tpkyaf6cuRPGt6ZR6p5BkFSWT4QAoUosX6UEXkUDsyo+Rv1/YjiBpGwHdbycqJ1fDchu
YkCbNEFbIzDgcmtjYXRL1NfT+8Ajy9dt2fHxT33u4gtv27V1M4CO7t7Lrrz6rLPOam7QN914/XkX
XvH9n/508sTxgrKJ8NA9d9/10OOf+PTnmpuaSBhakWD86OaxrWrTxrUKKFv65a//cMQRh8+dM1EE
OshPHtPc276tr7cIwiMPPf3E4iWf++q/aaC4Y8d119+43wEHzJ49m1T5pmuu++UvfvuFr37jiMMO
gItB9rF7H7z6xr/vd/Dh8+bPD1GG2AvPP6dx5Og3veOdAkSa7rnh+quuvPx1J73j+DccS4CChgqe
ePLx1es3HHXscdOnjAXsTbfc1tFdft3rT3iWRFgZuLiXbUBgD0eAoL29b+nSpTt27Bg9euzMmTOP
PvowXYkOFgtPTiuQUiJDZJoNMTWiZ/20jv9jMEOsb1RkehQhjj3bciEUaN3cMhLAuvWrOdT773dQ
odDQPKKhq7ujr6/vvvsemDFj1vjx473tW/LUE4EOZ02fQ2nJXd93843Xcdkt2vtgpQ07KIC4GASi
tSqVnQVWr9lcTvzRRx7ODlaQ0xgzZnRcFmfLAvz9zntfc8zxLY058smOHdu2bGt765sPjCIC88rl
y0xkZs2cDkqXTvn222/v6uiav2jvBkMKSLp6V63bOH7CmAljWwhg79p3tnV3u7mLFuXykCRB4GDM
0ytXcdkfcfgRORQR+yeWrhozacbeixaa59Hz17IrFTZKEqxfv3nFihV9fX3Tp0+fP29Ba2tQm75p
NAAD8ZleZh2vOgyKo+3vOlOTJIh0obEBQQDrc42NI5pbzj//z42NhWOPOE7rYMLEMR27d1533XWb
Nm16xzveoZVWCvfee3dDQ8N+++wDgMVe+Odz/+uXv5g2d/6JJ725o8t7z0lchpYxY1pHjmrZtnPn
kmVbL7v8qk984lOKfGBABG/dhAkTALS17bj4rzdOmTH72ONOcDaGkmuvu6FYkpNPfvvOjr6+np6n
nnrSlYsL588TAYhuvuyyq666CkF46jtPI8C68tqN2+598Kk3nXTCpPHR1m3tgTblctkKZs6eCyBQ
HuKXLVl29le+vs+hh3zkrA9qo3e3t1153c3Hvf5NIxoa1q/fPNzgsGdGEzMz83V/u+naq6/eunn9
IYcc8N53vfXww/YZ2RIowPuKNoDU7KImireeIvVqwsCy1HsoWziPUqnkEoswDAsNrPTrX//6N550
onNJQHrCuPHLlz2zbevmj531kXwuHycxadPc3NzVtfsPf/jtbbff+W/f+lZc7DNGTRg/8apr/vbY
E08qowKtwAyjp06d+vAjj513/gWf+NSnx45rbWjIA2wMdBhOnD6jLPjRD76Xy5m3veOtOlRGU7Gz
45q/Xdc6pnXpkqduuPaahubmOXPmAfzjH37viiuu/NIXPtfR0WnC3MFHHjV/7/kAQhPedMsdSYJZ
M6f8+Ef/uW7VKkAdc8yxkyaNvOOOu6wFGV7++KMnn/Kuw484/pprrpw0vgWCm6//e9vuLqfoj3/4
XdLb+4JmKgQ+/thjTn3Hya87/siJ41qFoZAqpMNoaEJNYYBKLH4FL3dLqOOlRE1iRYqBz9doaBNC
aYC6e0qjx4475ZRTGvIqMsa5GMwHHXjQW9/6ViIBOArDpJwce/RxzOWf/8ePf/aTH02ZPO2Y415X
KvG69Ws7du3Ye6+FYBhjYD0aRpgw19O+88CD9hsxIrQOEBWXyy5xnn0aXWGMfsPrjgs1rJM01KCv
bHd17F65bMkB+y4C4zVHHzN50qSbbvzbj378vebm5qOPOW71mvXTp09vaYAVC8CEDQnjb3+7ZuyY
lmOOOswmyYS5C973/jNXLn36qsv/dv/dd//nr349f699v/yVr0wc2+RtAqievjIZff/9940dPWrO
7FnD3TjZQx9OKaWUinJaQxTgPXvr01usdBaEztXbTATAe4//3975/EZVRXH8e869781r6YDy06QF
EoFA+JUKQYG4URtjhAQQw94QjTEGE9T4Z6BGDQaDRsXUGF24YOMPAgGDC2PiRtA22IJtATvVQjsz
7957jov3ZqYzhQiGxFj6zSxmMTOZ9949eWfufM/nO6uZKFLNLm0TS0jBAlTSYJhjQ4yQTo7HsRka
ujq/cwVZpJNjxfaO0kjZObdk6b0CL0EYYCbADPRdHhi6tG7T2vnFJFwvDQwO+zkLFy3pKiawQEid
NYry6IsHXtq6Y9/uvU9nxNRQcXFkYLhaLZ85deLDj4+99e4H1RA65iQkSiElcVcvj1wdLa1cvb6t
vV18xVj724WR4csjy7oWdHbdd+zwkf0vHDz65Vc7dj5SgMZamfhrvL//QmHe3FUr13ofYhL2ZcSF
wUul87/2qRvf/ED3PQs7leCDRiSUjqdefvx5sHP5/YsXzovMTf119X2LqRsYWbFldnUwaQAxMSEI
DAGU5a/lrvZbSGKf1f9V0+sqHyj0iix1Nq2kbYmFOPWOosSTdYqEKpI6w8UM+ZOGydgUACAoUkGc
gOFJIakFgdiRFSCCBueZrWH66ezJU9+d3vPMcwvmL6qWJzqSNgOGwocqWN9+5/CaNWsf7XmcCD7A
MKLMYzolWCl4IbbE7NI0jhUuffnAqx/1fn787A+rVi+LoLGklghEAeRVY4rEeWOB4GGtCACmDD5D
gCI4Z62ATYDN/ArOh+SfRgO1KRdHRDwAY4yqqlIGtRSBiBjD9XZPcxQMzdbVjFS9rhrSqdN+TXA8
BYwHA7CoAkAogACWjNlCIAhnA/kgBAIAA3FpauMEkIlrfw4NDa9Ysa6399OxK78/+/x+216s+rTN
WgL3/3KxOLcjSPn1Nw/t3LV367btjDx4U7VWVzlj0EFJiJWYwKpVw740fGXb9p6Nmx862vuJsWBk
RAgHwIMEHDcC4T0QQKyIpHGAdcRnkyX89nfrWj3m0817tfOcT0b/12tgVndetzgvXL/2dQpJy1pp
ysLMDNtMECAoojgBRMV/f+b0kffe797y8ES58tSuJwvtxar4gmFIKI2NHnrjUBzHXUsXb9iwobu7
O3OMuxBAJjJo6lQpc7UyAOfTQmT8xHh/f/+Fi0NP7FlesCg7n2Sh00ogze3njY04hgZkO/ONf2Kz
wSo7/ZhvR/Jv3jSrGaf6MmqeeriBIbrFaRrlFg2CgqU2SU4coDTFDCo1MjMT7OiVUn9fX/eDW195
7WCSxAFQH0xcAOCrvjT2x7Xr1/fu271x/bpiW1yuXEuSorUmlRr9SfOpYEGkAMEzyFo+d/7c8S8+
O3Hi5KYtWwYuDn779Tc9PY/deIE3UCoRAJAYcJ2Hm72AkMHGxNypO0krG3j6OZ7VTFO9D2ytK9zo
97oCkhECc4qYB3KOH/KGykEBiTJMmEC8BkMWqWdRjiwIwuqhAcrKMRkC1Hmy7LyLoii7z4mrEBhR
4oGgsAQLl2dHw3iwKiwU5EWzjwgQUhNPphJHICICMUDqQeoRIRvhrGEPQ17tuW8r5AxnQLjWwYqZ
TnK/Jd2EmTOtru6mOKi7TrVMvpZgyymg80YcYMtbtelpbYSBWojFhgxBbRRxHCMIiF1aIUgEw8QC
pKkXsEt9FJlqZdK7qneO2ZK1zgXVet46NfdyUAKUs30CBAOK01QKMXvvDchovc2j6V87ZLlomvFj
PCAh27BpYc3n3MLbkILrj1r/yY0buGJ28PBu0N9gdRP2+B6EUAAAACV0RVh0ZGF0ZTpjcmVhdGUA
MjAxOS0xMC0yMlQyMzoyOTo1MiswMjowMG9CfkMAAAAldEVYdGRhdGU6bW9kaWZ5ADIwMTktMTAt
MjJUMjM6MjA6MjgrMDI6MDBMv7tiAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC" />
</svg>



<svg width="344" height="152">
  <image id="image0" width="344" height="152" x="0" y="0"
    xlink:href="data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAVgAAACYCAIAAAAukWYXAAAABGdBTUEAALGPC/xhBQAAACBjSFJN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" />
</svg>






Obviously, this could seem to be an over-simplification. More complex
approaches have been proposed for this issue. For instance, according
to Qimron (1998: 31–43), the use of long and short
<span dir="rtl">עתיד</span> is influenced by the position of the
verb in the clause. According to Torres Fernández (2013: 219–20), some
long *wayyiqtol* forms represent dialectal variants. Bloch (2007;
2010) postulates that these kinds of problems can be solved on either
linguistic or text-critical grounds (the influence of modal forms,
dialectal variants, scribal errors and so on). But the most radical
and intriguing approach is Van de Sande’s theory of the “inexistence”
of the *wayyiqtol* and of the *weqatalti* as converted, inverted or
consecutive forms (Van de Sande 2008: 203–38).

All these approaches are possible and well argued, but for the purpose
of this synchronical analysis it will be sufficient to adopt our
simple theory. It will only be necessary to multiply our examples in
order to show that any combination of forms (short and long *yiqtol*
in first or second position, *wayyiqtol*, *weyiqtol*) in any order is
accounted for.

6 JOURNAL OF HEBREW SCRIPTURES

7.  ***THE SEQUENCES***

I will begin outlining my theory by identifying the sequences of
verbal forms in Standard BH. It is possible to identify two kinds of
sequences involving SC or PC. The first includes the following
patterns:

1.  SC

2.  SC + SC . . . ; SC + *waw* + SC . . .

3.  SC + PC . . . ; SC + *waw* + PC

4.  x + *waw* + PC . . .

5.  SC + PC + SC . . . ; SC + *waw* + PC + *waw +* SC . . .

6.  x + *waw* + PC + *waw* + SC . . .

In this table, “x” indicates any element: a secondary clause (with
conjugated or not conjugated verbs), an indication of time, a
non-verbal form (NV) or even any previous narrative or discourse.

I do not consider *waw* + PC (i.e., *wayyiqtol*) as a possible
beginning of a sequence in this phase of BH. Nevertheless, the *waw*
is necessary to connect “x” to PC.

The second kind includes the following patterns:

1.  PC

2.  PC + PC + . . . ; PC + *waw* + PC . . .

3.  PC + SC; PC + *waw* + SC . . .

4.  x + *waw* + SC . . .

5.  PC + SC + PC . . . ; PC + *waw* + SC + *waw +* PC . . .

6.  x + *waw* + SC + *waw* + PC . . .

Likewise, I do not consider *waw* + SC (i.e., *weqatal*) as a possible
beginning of a sequence in this phase of BH. Nevertheless, the *waw*
is necessary to connect “x” to SC.

At this point we must ask ourselves: What is the differ- ence between
the two kinds of sequences and, what is the dif- ference between
sequences of the same kind?

8.  ***TWO KINDS OF SEQUENCES***

If we do not analyze the single verbal forms independently, but rather
take sequences as units, it is possible to make a distinc- tion
between the two kinds of sequences. Omitting for the moment the
hypothetical construction, we can state that the first group of
sequences denotes: past perfect (anterior past,

3.4.3 Exod 12:35), simple past (3.1.3: Gen 1:1), present perfect
(anterior present, 3.1.1: Josh 7:11), present (5.2.1: Ps 65:10) and
future perfect (anterior future, 3.4.4: Isa 4:4). The second denotes:
present (4.1.3: Ps 121:1), future (4.1.1: 1 Sam 18:11) and future in
the past (posterior past, including prospective, 4.1.2: 2 Kgs 13:14).

This short list is not an innovation and roughly cor- responds to the
taxonomies of meaning for *qatal* and *yiqtol* in many grammar books
(Cook 2012: 78–79). In particular, it

SEQUENCES OF VERBAL FORMS AND TAXIS 7

should be remembered that the categories of anteriority and
posteriority have been applied to the Hebrew verbal system for a long
time (see for instance Joüon 1923: 509); while the cate- gory of
prospective was introduced in this field more recently by Joosten
(1999: 17–18; 2012: 281–83). I consider the category of “anteriority”
to be distinct from the category of “tense” as it is defined by Bybee,
Perkins and Pagliuca (1994: 54).

What is clear in these sequences is that if the first verbal form has
any value, the following verbal forms have the same value. For
instance, if SC has a past perfect value, the following verbal forms
(whether SC or PC) will have a past perfect value, while if SC has a
future perfect value the following verbal forms (whether SC or PC)
will have a future perfect value.

The difficulty is that this remains true even when the sequences do
not start with an introductory dominant verb. For instance, if a
sequence starts with “x + *waw* + PC,” PC assumes its temporal value
from “x” (or from the context), and the fol- lowing verbal forms
(whether SC or PC) will have the same value as the first PC.

To try to pinpoint a rule, we can state that the first group of
sequences expresses absolute past and anterior, so that we can define
them as “past/anterior sequences”; while the second group expresses
absolute future, posterior, and present, so that we can define them as
“non-past/non-anterior sequences” (compare Rogland 2003: 11).

These temporal values seem to represent the prominent meaning of the
sequences, but, as we will see, the opposition between the two groups
can be used in some contexts to dis- tinguish between different phasal
aspects (§ 5.2).

Lastly, when heading a sequence, both SC and PC can be translated into
English with a present tense. However, in the case of the former, this
applies only under certain circum- stances: namely, with stative verbs
(3.1.1: Josh 14:6); in performative utterances (see the discussions in
Rogland 2003: 115–26; Andrason 2011d); and, lastly, to denote some
phasal aspects (§ 5.2).

9.  ***TAXIS***

At this point it is opportune to explain the difference between the
sequences in each of the two groups. In other words, we must
understand why the author does not employ only two sequences: SC + SC
. . . and PC + PC . . . In order to do so, it is necessary to
introduce a new category: taxis. This term is defined by Maslov in the
following way:

Taxis is a category which defines the “action” denoted by the
predicate in terms of its relations with another “ac- tion,” named or
implied in the given utterance, that is, the chronological relations
between them (simultaneity, prec- edence or sequence) (Maslov 1988:
64).

I will adopt this category in order to explain BH syntax. This
approach is not completely new; in particular, Michel (followed by
Wagner 1997: 291) based his theory on a concept very close to taxis.
Building on the results of previous studies (Köhler,

8 JOURNAL OF HEBREW SCRIPTURES

Nyberg and Brockelmann), Michel concluded: “Das perfectum drückt eine
unabhängige Handlung aus . . . ; das imperfectum bezeichnet eine
abhängige Handlung” (1960: 256). Unfortu- nately, Michel combined
this clear distinction with a philo- sophical approach and the result
was a complex and rather un- clear theory.

“Independency” and “Dependency” are logical categories. However, they
also include chronological relations. Michel explained: “If a
perfectum follows syndetically or asyndetically on an imperfectum or a
participle, it does not advance” (Eng- lish translation: Waltke and
O’Connor 1990: 471). Put differ- ently: the perfect is simultaneous
or contemporaneous with the previous verbal form.

It should be noted that Michel tried to offer a definition of verbal
forms which was valid for both past and future sequences. In other
words, he based his theory on “fixed taxis.” In this article I instead
present a theory based on “relative taxis,” where the functions of the
verbal forms are not abso- lute, but relative to the sequences in
which they are used.

Finally, it should be noted that the category of “taxis” has recently
been applied to Hebrew grammar by Andrason (2011a; 2011b; 2011d) in
order to define the evolution of grams. Kuryłowicz (1973: 115–16) also
explains the syntax of Semitic languages according to this category,
but in his opinion *qatal* expresses anteriority and *yiqtol*
simultaneity. Ḥatav (1997: 175– 88; 2004: 514.518) employs the terms
“anteriority” and “sim- ultaneity” to define *qatal,* and
“sequentiality” to define *wayyiqtol* (*w + ay + yiqtol*),
*weyiqtol* (*w + yiqtol*) and *weqatal* (*w + qatal*)*.*

10. ***SEQUENCES AND TAXIS***

I combine the concept of taxis with that of sequences and examine
sequences involving SC and PC in prose and poetry, but I do not follow
the sequential approach in several respects:

1)  I do not assign to the introductory verb the role of determining the
    function of the following verbal forms.

2)  I consider not only the first and second place in a sequence, but
    also those which follow, so that I analyze not only SC + PC
    sequences, but also SC + PC + SC sequences.

3)  In these sequences, I do not distinguish between *way- yiqtol,*
    short *yiqtol* (*\*yaqtul*) and long *yiqtol* (*\*yaqtulu*) or
    between *qatálti* and *qataltí*. I seek to show that in this phase
    of BH (in poetry especially) the function of a verbal form depended
    on the position in the sequence and not on any morphological or
    phonetic element.

4)  I do not distinguish between the main level of com- munication
    (foreground) and the secondary level of communi- cation
    (background). The verbal forms SC and PC can be used on both levels.

5)  I consider the taxis not only as a “chronological” rela- tion, but
    also as a “logical” one.

SEQUENCES OF VERBAL FORMS AND TAXIS 9

In light of the above, I attempt to demonstrate that:

1)  SC and PC have different functions in a *past/anterior*

sequence and in a *non-past/non-anterior* sequence.

2)  In a *past/anterior* sequence, SC denotes a co-ordinate element,
    whereas PC denotes a sub-ordinate (usually succes- sive) element.

3)  In a *non-past/non-anterior* sequence, PC denotes a co- ordinate
    element while SC denotes a sub-ordinate (usually suc- cessive)
    element.
    
    11. ***CO-ORDINATION AND SUB-ORDINATION***

As these remarks indicate, the present theory is based on a dis-
tinction between two categories: co-ordination and subordi- nation.
Co-ordination is intended here as a verbal form which does not advance
the time or the logic of narration/discourse. Sub-ordination denotes
for its part a verbal form which advances the time or the logic of
narration or discourse.

The writer uses co-ordination (syndetically or asyndeti- cally) in the
following instances:

7.  Beginning: to initiate a new sequence.

8.  Epexegesis: to repeat the same action/state using dif- ferent words.

9.  Parenthetical remark: to add some particularity to the previous
    action/state/event.

10. Parallelism: to describe an action/state/event which is contemporary
    to/parallel with/opposite to the first.

11. Negation: to negate an action/state/event which is contemporary
    to/parallel with/opposite to the first.

12. Lists: to present a series of parallel actions/states/ events.

13. End: to stop the chain of events.

14. Generic parallelism: to describe an action paral- lel/opposite to a
    previous section.

15. Rhetoric: to underline an element in a chain.

All these usages are clearly connected one to the other. Often they
indicate a description or a circumstance, but it should be stressed
that this is not their only use. In a *past/anterior* sequence, SC is
more often used in the main level of communi- cation (foreground) than
in the second level of communication (background), that is to say, it
often has a *narrative* character, although it expresses
contemporaneity.

It is clear that if the usage of SC indicates that time does not go
forward, the writer needs another conjugation in order to describe a
non-parallel action. This is what PC does. I assign to PC (with or
without *waw*) in *past/anterior* sequences what Waltke and O’Connor
assign exclusively to *wayyiqtol*:

Relative *waw* with a prefix form represents a situation that is
usually successive and always subordinate to a preceding statement.
The succession may be either absolute or sub-

10 JOURNAL OF HEBREW SCRIPTURES

jective, and often the distinction between them is blurred. Temporal
sequence depends on objective fact outside the control of the speaker;
logical sequence, by contrast, sub- jectively exists in the way a
speaker sees the relationship between situations. Sometimes with
*wayyqtl* a situation is represented as a logical entailment from (a)
preceding one(s) or a logical contrast with it/them or as a sum-
marizing statement of it/them. (Waltke and O’Connor 1990: 547; compare
Joüon 1923: 91).

As stated, I do not consider such a sub-ordination to depend on the
*waw*: in a *past/anterior* sequence we can also apply this category
to *yiqtol* without *waw*. It is obvious that there is no limit to the
number of following actions and therefore there is no limit in the
usage of PC.

The usage of SC and PC in a *non-past/non-anterior* sequence is simply
the flipping of the usage of SC and PC in a *past/ anterior* sequence:
in *non-past/non-anterior* sequences the coordi- nation value is
expressed by PC and the sub-ordination value by SC. Nevertheless, here
we must distinguish between *epistemic* PC and *deontic* PC (Warren
2002: 150), which corresponds to the traditional distinction between
*indicative yiqtol* and *volitive yiqtol*. In the present study we can
only examine the first type of PC.

As we shall see, in both cases word order within the sen- tence is
irrelevant.

12. ***THE MEANINGS OF SC AND PC***

As we have seen, SC and PC have different meanings depend- ing on the
context.

In the first group of sequences, when SC appears in the first position
it has a temporal value (*past/anterior*); when it appears in
following positions it has a taxis value (*co-ordination*). In the
second group, SC does not appear in the first position and always has
a taxis value (*sub-ordination*).

The same can be said for PC: in the first group, PC does not appear in
the first position and always has a taxis value (*sub- ordination*).
In the second group of sequences, when PC appears in the first
position it has a temporal value (*non-past/non-ante- rior*); when it
appears in following positions it has a taxis value (*co-ordination*).

3.  **THE VERBAL FUNCTIONS IN A *PAST/ANTERIOR***

**SEQUENCE**

13. ***SC AS FIRST VERB***
    
    1.  ## SC as the First Verb in Main Sentence in Direct Speech

We can start our explanation by examining the syntax of direct speech
where the situation is quite clear: when SC is the first verbal form
in a sequence it represents the first action, state or event.

SEQUENCES OF VERBAL FORMS AND TAXIS 11

This first verbal form can indicate the first action/event if it is a
fientive verb, or a state if it is a stative verb. It may or may not
be the first word in the sentence: in this phase of BH, word order
inside a sentence does not affect the function of a verbal form.
Therefore we can assign the same function in the sequence to this
conjugation whether or not it comes as a first word inside the
sentence.

Josh 7:11 (verb-subject)

Israel **has sinned** (NRSV). Josh 14:6 (subject-verb)

You *too* **know**.

חָ ָטא ִי ְשׂרָ ֵאל

ַאתָּה ָידַ ְﬠ ָתּ

SC is used in the first position of a sequence even when it does not
represent the predicate in the sentence:

Josh 7:20 (subject as predicate)

ח ָטאִית

It is true; I **am the one who sinned** (NRSV).

אָ ְמ ָנה אָ ֹנ ִכי

It should be noted that BH does not allow simple past, present perfect
and past perfect to be distinguished; consequently, SC is used also
for an antefact. See for instance:

1 Sam 2:30

. . . �<span dir="rtl">יתְ</span>בּ
<span dir="rtl">י</span>תּ<span dir="rtl">ִ</span>
<span dir="rtl">ַמרְ</span> <span dir="rtl">ָא</span>
<span dir="rtl">ר</span>וֹ<span dir="rtl">אָמ</span>

I **had promised** that your family . . . (NRSV).

Furthermore, BH does not allow a distinction between realis and
irrealis, see Cook (2012: 202; compare Joosten 2012: 208–

12), who quotes Gen 26:10:

ָﬠם אֶת־אִ ְשׁ ֶ�תּ ה

ַחד אַ

ַכב שָׁ

<span dir="rtl">ט</span>ﬠ<span dir="rtl">ַ</span>
<span dir="rtl">ְמ</span> כּ

וּ<span dir="rtl">נ</span>לּ

<span dir="rtl">ָת</span>
<span dir="rtl">י</span>שׂ<span dir="rtl">ִ</span> ﬠ

מה־זּ ֹאת

What is this you have done to us? One of the people

**might** easily **have lain** with your wife (NRSV).

## SC as First Verb in a Secondary Clause

In secondary clauses as well, when SC is the first verbal form in a
chain, it represents the first action/state/event.

1 Sam 17:28 (x-*qatal*)

כּי ל ַמ ַﬠן ְראוֹת ה ִמּ ְל ָח ָמה ָירָ ְד ָתּ

For you **have come down** just to see the battle (NRSV). 1 Sam 26:21
(verb-subject)

ֲא ֶשׁר ָי ְקרָה ַנפְ ִשׁי בְּ ֵﬠי ֶני�

Because my life **was precious** in your sight (NRSV).

SC can be used to describe an antefact:

Gen 20:18 (infinitive-*qatal*)

תּ ַחת

12 JOURNAL OF HEBREW SCRIPTURES

א ִבי ֶמ ֶל�

ֵבית ל

ֶר ֶחם כּל־

<span dir="rtl">ד</span>ﬠ<span dir="rtl">ַ</span> בּ

ַצר ְיה ָוה ﬠ

כּי־ﬠָצֹר

For the LORD **had closed** fast all the wombs of the house of
Abimelech (NRSV).

See also Gen 26:15; Josh 24:32.

## SC as the First Verb in a Main Sentence in Narration

Here we can examine the function of SC in the main sentences in
narration. We must start from a problematic verse: Gen 1:1.

In ancient times the first word
<span dir="rtl">ית</span>שׁ<span dir="rtl">ִ</span>
<span dir="rtl">רֵא</span>בּ was considered a noun

in the absolute state employed in an adverbial locution of time,

and the following verb <span dir="rtl">רָא</span>בּ was taken as
representing the first

action of the narrative. This interpretation underlies all the ancient
versions, for instance the LXX: ἐν ἀρχῇ ἐποίησεν ὁ θεός. In recent
times, a different opinion has gained currency among scholars: the
first word is seen as a noun in the con- struct state (*in the
beginning of*) and introducing a subordinate clause: *in the beginning
when God created* (Niccacci 1991: 30–31; this opinion was already held
by Rashi)*.* According to this view,

the verb <span dir="rtl">רָא</span>בּ does not indicate the first
action of the narrative,

but background information.

I do not consider the possibility that
<span dir="rtl">ית</span>שׁ<span dir="rtl">ִ</span>
<span dir="rtl">רֵא</span>is a construct state as a definitive
argument against the ancient interpretation. The word
<span dir="rtl">ַאחַר</span> , for instance, comes in a construct
state (Joüon and Muraoka § 103) whether it is employed as a
conjunction (*after the time when*) or as an adverb (*after that*).
Compare:

Jer 41:16b

**After** he had slain Gedaliah (NRSV). Gen 18:5a

ְגּדַ ְל ָיה את־

ָכּה ה

אַחר

תַּ ֲﬠבֹרוּ

אַחר

ְבּ ֶכם ל

ֶל ֶחם ְו ַס ֲﬠדוּ פת־

ו ֶא ְק ָחה

Let me bring a little bread, that you may refresh your- selves, and
**after that** you may pass on (NRSV).

In the same way, in Gen 1:1
<span dir="rtl">ית</span>שׁ<span dir="rtl">ִ</span>
<span dir="rtl">רֵא</span>בּ

locution.

could be an adverbial

If we accept this hypothesis, we can conclude that there is no
difference between direct speech and narration syntax: in both cases
when SC is placed in the first position of the sequence it indicates
the first action/state/event.

SC can also introduce a new section in the main narrative:

Josh 9:3 (subject-verb)

. . . וּ<span dir="rtl">ְמע</span> שׁ

The inhabitants of Gibeon **heard** . . .

ויֹ ְשׁבֵי ִגבְעוֹן

See also 1 Kgs 14:1. This kind of sentence is in the foreground and
always incorporates the most important elements of the sequence.

2 Kgs 15:19 (verb-subject)

ﬠל־ ָה ָארֶץ

מ ֶל�־אוּשּׁר

בָּא פוּל

SEQUENCES OF VERBAL FORMS AND TAXIS 13

King Pul of Assyria **came** against the land (NRSV).

See also Josh 10:33 (introduced by <span dir="rtl">אז</span>).

1 Sam 28:3 (antefact)

Now Samuel **had died** (NRSV).

מֵת

שׁוְּמוּ ֵאל

## SC as the First Verb in a Main Sentence in Poetry

Likewise, in poetry, when SC is the first verbal form in a chain, it
represents the first action/state/event.

Ps 11:1 (x-*qatal*)

In the LORD I **take refuge** (NRSV). Ps 39:2 (*qatal*)

ח ִסיִית

בַּיה ָוה

I **said** . . . .

Ps 40:2 (infinitive-*qatal*)

. . . <span dir="rtl">י</span>תּ<span dir="rtl">ִ</span>
<span dir="rtl">ַמרְ</span> <span dir="rtl">א</span>

I **waited** patiently for the LORD (NRSV).

ק ִוּיִית ְיהוָה

קַ ֹוּה

2.  ***OTHER CONSTRUCTIONS IN THE FIRST PLACE OF A SEQUENCE***

A new sequence can be introduced not only by SC but by any other
element (see examples in GKC § 111), in particular by the
*macrosyntactic* signal <span dir="rtl">ויהי</span>, by NV, or by a
secondary clause.

In this phase of BH, if the author employs
<span dir="rtl">ויהי</span>, he/she wishes to stress that the new
sequence is related (temporally or logically) to a previous event
(compare the use of PC, § 3.4). Sometimes such a relationship is
explicit:

Josh 1:1

. . . <span dir="rtl">ה</span>שׁ<span dir="rtl">ֶ</span>
<span dir="rtl">מ</span>

After the death of Moses . . . (NRSV).

ֲח ֵרי מוֹת א

ו ְיהִי

In the usage of <span dir="rtl">ויהי</span> there is no difference
between narration and direct speech:

Gen 41:13

כּן ה ָיה

ַתר־ ָלנוּ פּ

<span dir="rtl">ר</span>שׁ<span dir="rtl">ֶ</span>
<span dir="rtl">ֲא</span> כּ

ו ְיהִי

As he interpreted to us, so it turned out (NRSV).

3.  ***SC AFTER ANOTHER SC***

If SC follows another SC, it expresses co-ordination.

14 JOURNAL OF HEBREW SCRIPTURES

## SC + SC in a Main Sentence in Direct Speech

1.  ***Epexegesis***

Gen 37:33 (infinitive-verb-subject, *qatal* without *waw*)

טָרֹף טֹרַף יוֹסֵף

א ָכ ָלְתהוּ

ח ָיּה ָר ָﬠה

A wild animal **has devoured** him; Joseph **is** without doubt
**torn** to pieces (NRSV).

Isa 41:4 (*weqatal*)

מִי־פָ ַﬠל ְו ָﬠָשׂה

Who **has performed** and **done** this? (NRSV).

See also Josh 4:7 (x*-qatal* without *waw*); 2 Sam 24:17 (*waw-*x-

*qatal*); 2 Kgs 19:21 and Isa 34:2 (*qatal* without *waw*).

# *Parenthetical Remark*

1 Sam 30:14

כּ ֵלב

ָדה ְו ַﬠל־ ֶנ ֶגב ליהוּ

ֵר ִתי ְו ַﬠל־ ֲא ֶשׁר ה ְכּ

פַּ ְשׁטנוּ ֶנ ֶגב

א ַנחְנוּ

באֵשׁ׃

שׂרַ ְפנוּ

ואֶת־ ִצ ְק ַלג

We **had made a raid** on the Negeb of the Cherethites and on that
which belongs to Judah and on the Negeb of Caleb; and we **burned**
Ziklag down (NRSV).

# *Parallelism*

Gen 20:5 (subject-verb)

ִחי הוּא א

ְמרָה א

ְו ִהיא־ ַגם־ ִהוא הוא

ִתי

ַמר־לִי א אָ

הל ֹא הוּא

**Did** he not himself **say** to me, ‘She is my sister?’ And she
herself **said**, ‘He is my brother’ (NRSV)

See also Gen 41:13; Judg 1:7; 1 Sam 18:8; 2 Sam 17:15.

# *Negation*

See for instance 2 Sam 18:29.

# *List*

Gen 27:37 (*waw-*x-*qatal*)

ָב ִדים ְו ָד ָגן ל ֲﬠ

ל� ְו ֶאת־כּל־א ָחיו ָנתִַיתּ לוֹ

שַׂ ְמ ִתּיו ס ַמ ְכִיתּו

ְגּ ִביר ֵהן ותִירֹשׁ

I **have** already **made** him your lord, and I **have given** him
all his brothers as servants, and with grain and wine I **have
sustained** him (NRSV).

See also Josh 7:11 (<span dir="rtl">וגם</span>-verb); 1 Sam 12:3.

SEQUENCES OF VERBAL FORMS AND TAXIS 15

## SC + SC in a Secondary Clause

1.  ***Epexegesis***

Deut 2:30

כִּי־ ִה ְקָשׁה ְיה ָוה אֱ� ֶהי� אֶת־רוּחוֹ ְואִ ֵמּץ אֶת־ ְל ָבבוֹ

For the LORD your God **had hardened** his spirit and

**made** his heart **defiant** (NRSV).

See also in poetry Ps 102:4 (x-*qatal*)

# *Parallelism*

2 Sam 7:1

ָכּל־א ְי ָביו׃ מ

ָסּ ִביב מ

ה ִני�ַ־לוֹ

ֵביתוֹ ַויה ָוה בּ

�<span dir="rtl">ֶל</span> מּ<span dir="rtl">ֶ</span>
<span dir="rtl">ה</span>

כּי־ ָישַׁב

Now when the king **was settled** in his house, and the LORD **had
given** him rest from all his enemies around him (NRSV).

# *Negation*

1 Kgs 3:11

שָׁ ַא ְלָתּ ֶאת־הַ ָדּ ָבר הַ ֶזּה ְול ֹא־שָׁ ַא ְלתּ . . . ְול ֹא־

ֶשׁר א

י ַﬠן

. . .תּ<span dir="rtl">ְלָ</span> <span dir="rtl">ַא</span>
<span dir="rtl">ָ</span>שׁ<span dir="rtl">ְו</span> . . .
תּ<span dir="rtl">ָ</span> <span dir="rtl">ְל</span>
<span dir="rtl">ַא</span> <span dir="rtl">ָ</span>שׁ

Because you **have asked** this, and **have** not **asked** . . . and

**have** not **asked** . . . and **have asked** . . . (NRSV).

*Qatal* and not-*qatal* are equivalent.

## SC + SC in a Main Sentence in Narration

1.  ***Epexegesis***

1 Kgs 11:1–2 (subject-verb; x-*qatal*)

דָּ ַבק בּהֶם

ַהב נָ ִשׁים ָנ ְכ ִרוֹיּת ַרוֹבּת . . . אָ

ו ַה ֶמּ ֶל� שְׁ�מה

שְׁ�מה ל ַא ֲה ָבה׃

King Solomon **loved** many foreign women . . . Solomon

**clung** to these in love (NRSV).

# *Parenthetical remark*

1 Kgs 15:1–2

ﬠל־

ִב ָיּם אֲ

ַל� מָ

ְנ ָבט בּן־

ֶל� ָי ָר ְב ָﬠם ל ֶמּ

<span dir="rtl">ֵרה</span> שׂ<span dir="rtl">ְ</span> ﬠ

ֶנה שׁמ

וּ ִב ְשׁ ַנת

�<span dir="rtl">ָל</span>
<span dir="rtl">ָ</span>שׁוּ<span dir="rtl">יר</span>בּ

ַל� מָ

ִנים שׁ

שׁ�שׁ

יהוּ ָדה׃

Now in the eighteenth year of King Jeroboam son of Nebat, Abijam
**began to reign** over Judah. He **reigned** for three years in
Jerusalem (NRSV).

# *Parallelism*

Gen 19:23–24 (subject-verb)

בָּא צֹ ֲﬠרָה׃

ָה ָא ֶרץ ְולוֹט ﬠל־

השֶּׁ ֶמשׁ ָיצָא

16 JOURNAL OF HEBREW SCRIPTURES

The sun **rose** on the earth and *at that moment* Lot **came** to
Zoar.

1.  Sam 4:11 (subject-verb)

ְפ ִני וּ ִפי ְנחָס׃ חָ

מֵתוּ

ֵני־ ֵﬠ ִלי ב

ואֲרוֹן אֱ� ִהים ִנ ְלָקח וּ ְשׁ ֵני

The ark of God **was captured**; and the two sons of Eli, Hophni and
Phinehas, **died** (NRSV).

A few verses later, in 1 Sam 4:17, we see the same syntax in direct
speech.

See also Gen 18:20; Josh 11:13; Judg 3:24; 1 Sam 9:17.

# *Negation*

2.  Kgs 3:3

ִי ְשׂ ָראֵל דָּ ֵבק אֶת־

ֶשׁר־ ֶה ֱח ִטיא א

בֶּן־ ְנבָט

ַחטּ ֹאות ָירָ ְב ָﬠם בּ

רַק

לֹא־סָר מִ ֶמּ ָנּה׃

Nevertheless he clung to the sin of Jeroboam son of Nebat, which he
caused Israel **to commit**; he **did** not **de- part** from it
(NRSV).

## SC + SC in Poetry

1.  ***Epexegesis***

Ps 85:3–4 (*qatal* without *waw*)

ַס ְפָתּ ָכל־ﬠֶבְ ָר ֶת� א

ָלה׃ סֶ

כּ ִסּיָת ָכל־חַ ָטּאתָם

�<span dir="rtl">ֶ</span>מּﬠ

<span dir="rtl">ן</span>וֹ<span dir="rtl">ֲ</span>ﬠ

נשָׂא ָת

אַ ֶ�פּ׃

מחֲרוֹן

ה ִשׁיבוֹת

You **forgave** the iniquity of your people; you **pardoned** all
their sin. Selah. You **withdrew** all your wrath; you **turned** from
your hot anger (NRSV).

# *Parallelism*

Ps 9:6 (*qatal* without *waw*)

גּ ַﬠרְ ָתּ גוֹיִם א ַבּדְ ָתּרָ ָשׁע

You have **rebuked** the nations, you have **destroyed** the wicked
(NRSV).

# *Negation*

Compare, for instance, Ps 102:18.

# *List*

Ps 74:13–15 (x-*qatal* and *qatal*)

ﬠל־הַ ָמּ ִים׃

ָﬠ ְ�זּ ָים ִנים בְ ַתנִּי

פוֹ ַררְ ָתּ ָרא ֵשׁי אתָּה ִשׁ ַבּרְ ָתּ

ל ִצ ִיּים׃

ָﬠם ל

ֲא ָכל מ

וּנּ<span dir="rtl">ֶנ</span> תּ<span dir="rtl">ְ</span> תּ

ְו ָי ָתן ל

אתָּה ִרצְַּצָתּ ָרא ֵשׁי

מ ְﬠ ָין ָו ָנחַל

בָ ַקְﬠָתּ

אתָּה

אתָּה הוֹ ַבְ ָתּשׁ ַנ ֲהרוֹת אי ָתן׃

SEQUENCES OF VERBAL FORMS AND TAXIS 17

You **divided** the sea by your might; you **broke** the heads of the
dragons in the waters. You **crushed** the heads of Leviathan; you
gave him as food for the creatures of the wilderness. You **cut**
openings for springs and torrents; you **dried** up ever-flowing
streams (NRSV).

This array of SC is correctly interrupted by one occurrence of PC (see
§ 5.3). See also Jer 2:8.

4.  ***PC IN THE SECOND POSITION***

It is clear that if the usage of SC indicates that time does not go
forward, the writer needs another conjugation in order to describe a
non-parallel action. As I have salready mentioned, this is what PC
does.

## . . . + PC in Direct Speech

Gen 24:35

מאד ַו ִיּ ְגדָּל

ֲאדֹ ִני את־

�<span dir="rtl">ַר</span> בּ

ויה ָוה

The LORD has greatly blessed my master, and he **has become wealthy**
(NRSV).

Gen 37:7 (*waw-x-yiqtol* and *wayyiqtol*)

מּתֵי ֶכם

ֻל א

ֻס ֶבּי ָנה תְ

ָמּ ִתי ְו ַגם־ ִנ ָצּ ָבה ְו ִה ֵנּה א ֻל

ָמה ק

ו ִה ֵנּה

ַותִּ ְשַׁ ֲתּח ֶויןָ ַל ֲא ֻל ָמּתִי׃

Suddenly my sheaf rose and stood upright; then your sheaves
**gathered** around it, and **bowed** down to my sheaf (NRSV).

Isa 63:3 (*we-yiqtol*)

בְּאַ ִפּי

ִתּי ְו ֶא ְדרְ ֵכם א

ִאישׁ אין־

ִדּי וּ ֵמ ַﬠ ִמּים ל ַב

וּפּ ָרה ָדּ ַר ְכ ִתּי

ְג ָא ְל ִתּי א

ְבּ ָג ַדי ְו ָכל־ ַמ ְלוּבּ ַשׁי ﬠל־

ָמתִי וְ ֵיז ִנ ְצ ָחם בּ ֲח

ו ֶארְ ְמ ֵסם

I have trodden the wine press alone, and from the peoples no one was
with me; I **trod** them in my anger and **tram- pled** them in my
wrath; their juice **spattered** on my gar- ments, and stained all my
robes (NRSV).

## . . . + PC in a Secondary Clause

1 Sam 15:24

בּקוֹ ָלם׃

את־ ָה ָﬠם ָו ֶאְ ַשׁמע

כּי ָי ֵרא ִתי

Because I feared the people and **obeyed** their voice (NRSV).

## . . . + PC in Narration

1 Sam 1:10–11 (*wayyiqtol* and *waw*-infinitive-*yiqtol*)

ְב ֶכּה׃ ַותִּדֹּר ֶנדֶר תִ

ְיה ָוה וּ ָבכֹה ﬠל־

<span dir="rtl">ל</span>לּ<span dir="rtl">ֵ</span>
פּ<span dir="rtl">ַת</span>
<span dir="rtl">ְִ</span>תּ<span dir="rtl">ַו</span> . . .

She **prayed** to the LORD, and **wept** bitterly. She **made**

this vow (NRSV).

18 JOURNAL OF HEBREW SCRIPTURES

I consider <span dir="rtl">ה</span>כּ<span dir="rtl">ֶ</span>
<span dir="rtl">ְב</span> <span dir="rtl">תִ</span> a punctual action.
The insertion of the infini- tive shows that the author considered
*yiqtol* equivalent to *way- yiqtol*. See also 1 Kgs 3:4.

Deut 4:41 (long *yiqtol* without *waw*, with
<span dir="rtl">אז</span>)

ﬠ ִרים

שׁ�שׁ

ֶשׁה מ

ַי ְבדִּיל אָז

. . .

. . . then Moses **set apart** three cities (NRSV).

See also Josh 8:30; 19:50; 22:1; 2 Sam 12:31; 1 Kgs 3:4; 8:1; 2

Kgs 3:24–26.

PC is also used in negative sentences when the writer wishes to stress
that the following verbal form is successive:

1.  Kgs 1:1 (*yiqtol*)

ְבּ ָג ִדים ְול ֹא ִיחַם לוֹ׃ בּ

ִמים ַו ְי ַכ ֻסּהוּ בּ ָיּ

ו ַה ֶמּ ֶל� ָדּ ִוד ָז ֵקן בּא

King David was old and advanced in years; and although they covered
him with clothes, he **could** not **get warm** (NRSV).

2.  Sam 2:28 (*yiqtol*)

ֲח ֵרי א

ָה ָﬠם ְול ֹא־ ִירְ ְדּפוּ עוֹד כּל־

וּ<span dir="rtl">ְמד</span> ﬠ<span dir="rtl">ַ</span>
יּ<span dir="rtl">ַ</span> <span dir="rtl">ַו</span>
<span dir="rtl">ָפר</span> וֹשּׁבּ

ו ִיּ ְת ַקע יוֹ ָאב

ִי ְשׂרָ ֵאל

Joab sounded the trumpet and all the people stopped; they no longer
**pursued** Israel (NRSV).

See also 1 Sam 1:7.

In some instances, the logical subordination of PC is clear even when
there is no succession:

Gen 32:25–26

ָשּׁ ַחר׃ ה

<span dir="rtl">ת</span>וֹ<span dir="rtl">ל</span>ﬠ
<span dir="rtl">ד</span>ﬠ

וֹמּﬠ

אישׁ

ַבוֹדּ ַו ֵיּאָ ֵבק ל

<span dir="rtl">קֹב</span>ﬠ<span dir="rtl">ֲ</span>
<span dir="rtl">ַי</span>
<span dir="rtl">ֵתר</span>וּ<span dir="rtl">ָ</span>
יּ<span dir="rtl">ִ</span> <span dir="rtl">ַו</span> . . .

בּ ַכף־ ְירֵכוֹ

ל ֹא ָיכֹל לוֹ ַו ִגּיַּע כּי

ו ַיּרְא

Jacob **was left alone**; and a man **wrestled** with him until
daybreak. When the man **saw** that he did not prevail against Jacob,
he **struck** him on the hip socket (NRSV).

In this example no succession is involved: the action of wrest- ling
was not over when the man struck Jacob, but it is clear that
<span dir="rtl">רְא</span>יּ<span dir="rtl">ַ</span>
<span dir="rtl">ַו</span> and
<span dir="rtl">ַע</span>גּיּ<span dir="rtl">ִ</span>
<span dir="rtl">ַו</span> are sub-ordinate to
<span dir="rtl">ֵבק</span>
<span dir="rtl">אָ</span>יּ<span dir="rtl">ֵ</span>
<span dir="rtl">ַו</span> . See also Gen 37:34–35.

It is very rare that PC is not the continuation of a single verbal
form. However, it can be considered the continuation of the previous
narrative: see, e.g., 1 Sam 15:1. This is the explanation for many of
the so-called “initial *wayyiqtol.*”

When SC represents an antefact, the following PC can indicate an
action/state/event that continues the antefact, or an
action/state/event that occurs later (GKC § 111n-x).

Exod 12:35

ִמּצְ ַר ִים כְּ ֵלי־כֶ ֶסף מ

מ ֶשׁה ַו ִיְּ ֲשׁאלוּ

ְד ַבר כּ

וּשׂ<span dir="rtl">ָ</span>ﬠ

וּ ְב ֵני־ ִי ְשׂרָ ֵאל

וּ ְכ ֵלי ָז ָהב וּ ְשׂ ָמ�ת׃

The Israelites **had done** as Moses told them; they **had asked** the
Egyptians for jewelry of silver and gold, and for clothing (NRSV).

SEQUENCES OF VERBAL FORMS AND TAXIS 19

See also Josh 2:6.

Josh 13:12

משֶׁה ַויֹּרִ ֵשׁם׃

ְר ָפ ִאים ַו ַכּיֵּם ה

ֶיּ ֶתר מ

הוּא ִנשְׁ ַאר

He alone **was left** of the survivors of the Rephaim and

*later* Moses **defeated** them and **driven** them **out**. Deut 2:12
(subject-verb, *yiqtol*)

ִיירָוּשׁם שׂﬠָו

ִנים וּבְ ֵני לפָ

ִרים החֹ

וּ ְבשֵׂ ִﬠיר ָישְׁבוּ

Moreover, the Horim **had** formerly **inhabited** Seir, but the
descendants of Esau **dispossessed** them (NRSV).

## . . . + PC in Poetry

Ps 8:6–7 (x + PC; *wayyiqtol*, *waw-*x-*yiqtol* and *yiqtol*)

תּ ַﬠ ְטּרֵהוּ׃ ַתּ ְמִישׁ ֵלהוּ

ִהים ְו ָכבוֹד ְו ָה ָדר מ ֱא�

<span dir="rtl">ט</span>ﬠ<span dir="rtl">ַ</span> מּ

ו ְתּ ַח ְסּרֵהוּ

ְבּ ַמ ֲﬠ ֵשׂי ָידֶי�

Yet you **have made** them a little lower than God, and **crowned**
them with glory and honor. You **have given** them dominion over the
works of your hands (NRSV).

Ps 24:2 (*waw-*x-*yiqtol*)

כּי־הוּא ﬠל־ ַי ִמּים ְי ָס ָדהּ ְו ַﬠל־ ְנ ָהרוֹת ְיכוֹנְ ֶנ ָה

For he has founded it on the seas, and **established** it on the
rivers (NRSV).

Ps 44:3 (*wayyiqtol*, *yiqtol*, *wayyiqtol*)

לאֻ ִמּים ַו ְתַּ ְלּשׁ ֵחם׃

תּרַע

אתָּה ָי ְד� וֹגּ ִים הוֹ ַר ְתּשָׁ ַותִּ ָטּ ֵﬠם

You with your own hand drove out the nations, but them you
**planted**; you **afflicted** the peoples, but them you **set free**
(NRSV).

Ps 44:10 (negative; *yiqtol*)

אף־ ָז ַנ ְח ָתּ ַותַּ ְכ ִלי ֵמנוּ ְולֹא־תֵ ֵצא בּ ִצ ְבאוֹתינוּ

Yet you have rejected us and abased us, and **have** not

**gone out** with our armies (NRSV). Ps 66:6 (x-*yiqtol*)

ברָ ֶגל

ָנּ ָהר ַי ַﬠְברוּ בּ

ַי ָבּ ָשׁה ל

ה ַפ� ָים

He turned the sea into dry land; they **passed** through the river on
foot (NRSV).

Ps 69:21–22 (*wayyiqtol* and *waw-*x-*yiqtol*)

לָנוּד וָ ַא ִין וְ ַל ְמ ַנ ֲח ִמים וְל ֹא

לבִּי ָו ָאנוָּשׁה ָו ֲאַ ֶוּקה

ָרה שׁבְ

ח ְרפָּה

מֶץ׃

ִתי ר ֹאשׁ ְו ִל ְצ ָמ ִאי ַי ְשׁקוּני בּ ָברוּ

מ ָצאתי׃ ַו ִתּיְּנוּ

Insults have broken my heart, so that I **am in despair**. I
**looked** for pity, but there was none; and for comforters, but I
found none. They **gave** me poison for food, and for my thirst they
**gave** me vinegar **to drink** (NRSV).

20 JOURNAL OF HEBREW SCRIPTURES

Ps 74:14 (*yiqtol*)

ל ִצ ִיּים׃

ָﬠם ל

ֲא ָכל מ

וּנּ<span dir="rtl">נ</span>תּ<span dir="rtl">ֶ</span>
<span dir="rtl">ְִ</span>תּ

ְו ָיתָן ל

אתָּה ִר ַצּ ְצתָּ ָרא ֵשׁי

You crushed the heads of Leviathan; you **gave** him as food for the
creatures of the wilderness (NRSV).

Ps 78:13–15 (*wayyiqtol* and *yiqtol*)

בַּ ִמּדְ ָבּר

צרִים

<span dir="rtl">ע</span>קּ<span dir="rtl">ַ</span>
<span dir="rtl">ַב</span> <span dir="rtl">ְי</span> . . .
<span dir="rtl">ֵנד</span>
<span dir="rtl">־</span>וֹ<span dir="rtl">מ</span>כּ

ַקע ָים ַו ַיּ ֲﬠ ִבירֵם ַו ַיּ ֶצּב־ ַמ ִים בּ

He divided the sea and **let** them **pass** through it, and **made**
the waters **stand** like a heap. . . . He **split** rocks open in the
wilderness (NRSV).

Ps 78:20 (*wayyiqtol* and *waw*-x-*yiqtol*)

הֵן הִ ָכּה־צוּר ַו ָיּזוּבוּ מ ִים וּנ ָח ִלים ִישְׁטֹפוּ

Even though he struck the rock so that water **gushed out**

and torrents **overflowed** (NRSV). Ps 78:42–50 (*wayyiqtol* and
*yiqtol*)

ִמ ְצ ַר ִים בּ

ֶשׁר־ ָשׂם א

ִנּי־ ָצר׃ מ

ֶשׁר־ ָפּ ָדם א

ָידוֹ יוֹם את־

ל ֹא־ ָז ְכרוּ

ֶהם ְו ֹנ ְז ֵלי ֶהם א ֵרי

ָדם ְי ל

בּ ְשׂ ֵדה־צֹ ַﬠן׃ ַו ַיּהֲ ֹפ�

אתוֹתיו וּמוֹ ְפ ָתיו

ַויּ ֹא ְכ ֵלם וּ ְצ ַפרְ ֵדּ ַ� ַותַּ ְשׁ ִחיֵתם׃ ﬠרֹב

ֶהם בּ

בּל־ ִישְׁ ָתּיוּן׃ ְישַׁ ַלּח

בַּבָּ ָרד ַגּפְ ָנם

ַא ְרבֶּה׃ ַיהֲרֹג ל

ָח ִסיל ְיבוּלם ִוי ִגי ָﬠם ל

ו ִתּיֵּן

ְר ָשׁ ִפים׃ ל

ָרם וּ ִמ ְק ֵני ֶהם בּ ִﬠי

ָבּ ָרד ל

ֲח ָנ ַמל׃ ַו ַיּסְ ֵגּר בּ

ו ִשׁ ְקמוֹתם

מ ְל ֲא ֵכי

ְשׁ ַל ַחת מ

ָרה ָו ַז ַﬠם ְו ָצ ָרה ﬠ ְב

וֹפּ<span dir="rtl">א</span>

חרוֹן

ישַׁ ַלּח־בָּם

רָ ִﬠים׃ ְיפַ ֵלּס ָנ ִתיב ל ַאוֹפּ

They did not keep in mind his power, or the day when he redeemed them
from the foe; when he displayed his signs in Egypt, and his miracles
in the fields of Zoan. He **turned** their rivers to blood, so that
they could not drink of their streams. He **sent** among them swarms
of flies, which **devoured** them, and frogs, which **destroyed**
them. He **gave** their crops to the caterpillar, and the fruit of
their labor to the locust. He **destroyed** their vines with hail, and
their sycamores with frost. He **gave** over their cattle to the hail,
and their flocks to thunderbolts. He **let loose** on them his fierce
anger, wrath, indignation, and distress, a company of destroying
angels. He **made** a path for his an- ger (NRSV).

Ps 78:64 (negative; *yiqtol*)

תִ ְב ֶכּי ָנה׃

ֶרב ָנ ָפלוּ ְו ַא ְל ְמ ֹנ ָתיו ל ֹא בּ ֶח

כֹּ ֲה ָניו

Their priests fell by the sword, and *after this* their widows

**made** no lamentation.

Ps 80:6–7 (*wayyiqtol*, *yiqtol* and *waw-x-yiqtol*)

תִּישׂ ֵמנוּ

ִלישׁ׃ שׁ

ְד ָמעוֹת בּ

ֶחם ִדּ ְמ ָﬠה ַו ַתְּשׁקמוֹ ל

ה ֱא ַכ ְל ָתּם

א ְי ֵבינוּ ִי ְל ֲﬠגוּ־לָמוֹ׃

ְשׁ ֵכ ֵנינוּ ְו ל

מדוֹן

You have fed them with the bread of tears, and **given** them tears to
drink in full measure. You **made** us the scorn of our neighbors; our
enemies **laughed** among themselves.

SEQUENCES OF VERBAL FORMS AND TAXIS 21

Ps 81:7–8 (*yiqtol*, *wayyiqtol*, *yiqtol*)

ָת קרָא

ֲﬠבֹרְ ָנה׃ ַבּ ָצּרָה תּ

<span dir="rtl">ד</span>וּדּ<span dir="rtl">מ</span>

<span dir="rtl">יו</span>פּ<span dir="rtl">ָ</span> כּ

וֹ<span dir="rtl">ְכמ</span> שׁ

ֵסּ ֶבל מ

ה ִסירוֹ ִתי

מ ִרי ָבה

ﬠל־מי

א ְבָ ְחנ�

ֵס ֶתררַ ַﬠם בּ

ֶﬠ ְנ� אֶ

ו ֲאַ ְחלּ ֶצ ָךּ

I relieved your shoulder of the burden; your hands **were freed** from
the basket. In distress you called, and I **res- cued** you; I
**answered** you in the secret place of thunder; I **tested** you at
the waters of Meribah (NRSV).

Ps 105:40 (*wayyiqtol* and *waw*-x-*yiqtol*)

שׁ ַמ ִים ַישְׂ ִבּי ֵﬠם׃

ָלו ְו ֶל ֶחם שׂ

שָׁ ַאל ַו ָיּבֵא

He asked, and he **brought** quails, and **gave** them food from
heaven in abundance (NRSV).

Ps 114:3 (*wayyiqtol* and *yiqtol*)

לאָחוֹר

ַיּרְ ֵדּן יִסֹּב ה

ה ָיּם ָר ָאה וַ ָיּ ֹנס

The sea looked and **fled**; Jordan **turned** back (NRSV). Jer
2:14–15 (x-*yiqtol*)

ﬠָ ָליו

ַבז׃ ל

ָיה ה

�<span dir="rtl">ַ</span> וּדּ<span dir="rtl">מ</span>

ִית הוּא בּ

ְי ִליד אם־

ה ֶﬠ ֶבד ִי ְשׂ ָר ֵאל

ישְׁ ֲאגוּ כ ִפרִים

Is Israel a slave? Is he a homeborn servant? Why then has he become
plunder? The lions **have roared** against him (NRSV).

See also Ps 78:58 (*yiqtol*); 80:6–7 (*yiqtol*); Isa 41:5 (*weyiqtol*,
*yiqtol*

and *wayyiqtol*).

Isa 4:4 (future perfect, *waw-*x-*yiqtol*)

ִצוֹיּן ְואֶת־ ְדּ ֵמי ְירוּ ָשׁ ַל� בּנוֹת־

אִם ָר ַחץ אֲדֹ ָני אֵת צֹאַת

ִמ ִקּרְ ָהּבּ

Once the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the daughters of
Zion and **cleansed** the bloodstains of Jeru- salem from its midst.

See also Isa 6:11 (compare GKC §§ 106o, 107l).

5.  ***COMING BACK TO SC***

If the writer needs a co-ordinate verbal form after PC, he/she comes
back to SC.

## . . . PC + SC in Direct Speech

1.  ***Epexegesis***

Gen 41:11(x*-qatal* without *waw*)

וֹ<span dir="rtl">מ</span>�<span dir="rtl">ח</span>

ִפ ְתרוֹן כּ

אישׁ

ִני ָוהוּא א

ָחד א

ַל ְי ָלה בּ

חלוֹם

ו ַנּ ַח ְל ָמה

חָ ָל ְמנוּ׃

We dreamed on the same night, he and I, each **having a dream** with
its own meaning (NRSV).

22 JOURNAL OF HEBREW SCRIPTURES

# *Parallelism*

Deut 6:22–23 (*waw*-x-*qatal*)

משָּׁם

בּ ִמ ְצרַ ִים . . . ְואוֹתנוּ הוִֹציא

. . . <span dir="rtl">תת</span>

ו ִיּ ֵתּן ְיה ָוה אוֹ

The LORD displayed before signs . . . against Egypt. He

**brought** us **out** from there (NRSV). 1 Kgs 12:29

בּדָן

ְואֶת־ ָהאֶ ָחד ָנתַן בּ ֵבית־אֵל

ו ָיּ ֶשׂם אֶת־הָאֶ ָחד

He set one in Bethel, and the other he **put** in Dan (NRSV).

Here, there are two perfectly symmetrical actions in the fore- ground.
See also 1 Kgs 3:20.

# *List*

1 Sam 22:10 (with *waw*)

ְפּ ִל ְשׁ ִתּי ָנתַן ה

ֶרב ָגּ ְל ָית ח

בּיהָוה וְ ֵצידָה ָנתַן לוֹ וְ ֵאת

ַו ִיּ ְשׁ ַאל־לוֹ

לוֹ׃

He inquired of the LORD for him, \[**and**\] **gave** him provi-
sions, **and gave** him the sword of Goliath the Philistine (NRSV).

See also Deut 3:8–13 (without *waw*).

# *Generic Parallelism*

1 Sam 19:5 (verb as first word; without *waw*)

ָכל־ ִי ְשׂ ָר ֵאלרָ ִאי ָת ַו ִשׂתְּ ָמח ל

<span dir="rtl">ָלה</span> וֹ<span dir="rtl">ְגד</span>
<span dir="rtl">ה</span>ﬠ<span dir="rtl">ָ</span> וּשׁתּ

ו ַיּ ַשׂﬠ ְיה ָוה

And the LORD brought about a great victory for all Israel. You **saw**
it, and rejoiced (NRSV).

## . . . PC + SC in Narration

1.  ***Epexegesis***

Josh 11:12 (verb-subject, without *waw*)

ה ֱחרִים אוֹתם

ִפי־ ֶח ֶרב ל

<span dir="rtl">ם</span>כּ<span dir="rtl">ֵ</span>
יּ<span dir="rtl">ַ</span> <span dir="rtl">ו</span>

He struck them with the edge of the sword, he utterly

**destroyed** them.

See also 1 Sam 14:35.

# *Parenthetical Remark*

Num 7:6–8

אל־

את־ ָה ֲﬠ ָג�ת ְו ֶאת־ ַה ָבּ ָקר ַו ִיּ ֵתּן אוֹ ָתם

ֶשׁה מ

<span dir="rtl">ַח</span>קּיּ<span dir="rtl">ִ</span>
<span dir="rtl">ַו</span> . . .

ְב ֵני ֵגרְוֹשׁן ל

ָבּ ָקר ָנתַן ה

ְר ַבּ ַﬠת א

ה ֲﬠ ָג�ת ְו ֵאת

<span dir="rtl">י</span>תּ<span dir="rtl">ֵ</span> שׁ

ה ְל ִו ִיּם׃ את

לבְ ֵני

ָבּ ָקר ָנתַן ה

ַנת שׁמ

ה ֲﬠ ָג�ת ְו ֵאת

ְר ַבּע א

ָד ָתם׃ ְו ֵאת ﬠבֹ

כּ ִפי

ﬠבֹ ָד ָתם

ִפי כּ

מ ָר ִרי

SEQUENCES OF VERBAL FORMS AND TAXIS 23

So Moses took the wagons and the oxen, and gave them to the Levites:
two wagons and four oxen he **gave** to the Gershonites, according to
their service; and four wagons and eight oxen he **gave** to the
Merarites, according to their service (NRSV).

See also Josh 6:15; 6:23; 1 Sam 6:12.

# *Parallelism*

Gen 19:36–38

. . . <span dir="rtl">ן</span>בּ

ְבּ ִכי ָרה ה

ֲא ִבי ֶהן׃ ַו ֵתּ ֶלד מ

בנוֹת־לוֹט

<span dir="rtl">י</span>תּ<span dir="rtl">ֵ</span> שׁ

<span dir="rtl">ֶריןָ</span> <span dir="rtl">ֲה</span>
תּ<span dir="rtl">ַ</span> <span dir="rtl">ַו</span> . . .

ו ַה ְצּ ִﬠי ָרה ַגם־ ִהוא ָי ְלדָה בֵּן

Thus both the daughters of Lot became pregnant by their father. The
firstborn bore a son . . . the younger also **bore** a son (NRSV).

These sorts of sequences are very frequent: see for instance Gen
4:3–4; 18:33; 25:5–6; 27:5–6; 35:18; 40:21–22; 41:51–52;

41:54; Josh 4:12; 6:25; 10:13. In all these occurrences the paral-
lelism is between two symmetrical actions in the foreground (in this
respect I agree with Cook 2012: 297). There is no differ- ence in the
aspect, in the tense, or in the function of these ver- bal forms.

# *Negation*

1 Sam 3:18 (with *waw*)

וּנּ<span dir="rtl">ֶ</span>מּ<span dir="rtl">מִ</span>

כחֵד

ַה ְדּ ָב ִרים וְלֹא את־כּל־

שׁמוּאל

ו ַיּ ֶגּד־לוֹ

So Samuel told him everything **and hid** nothing from him (NRSV).

Josh 11:11 (without *waw*)

כּל־

ֲח ֵרם ל ֹא נוֹתר ה

ִפי־ ֶח ֶרב ל

הּבּ<span dir="rtl">ָ</span>
<span dir="rtl">ר־</span>שׁ<span dir="rtl">ֶ</span>
<span dir="rtl">א</span>

ַה ֶנּ ֶפשׁ את־כּל־

וּכּיּ<span dir="rtl">ַ</span> <span dir="rtl">ו</span>

ְנשָׁ ָמה

And they put to the sword all who were in it, utterly destroying them;
there **was** no one **left** who breathed (NRSV).

See also Josh 13:14.

# *List*

Josh 15:2–3 (with *waw*)

ֶנה ֶנ ְג ָבּה׃ הפּ

ַה ָשׁלֹּן מן־

ֶמּ ַלח ה

ְק ֵצה ָים מ

ֶהם ְגּבוּל ֶנ ֶגב ל

ו ְי ִהי

מִ ֶנּ ֶגב

צִ ָנה ְוﬠָ ָלה

ְק ַר ִבּים ְו ָﬠַבר ﬠ

ַמﬠֲ ֵלה ל

ֶנּ ֶגב אל־מ

ו ָיצָא

הקַּ ְרקָ ָﬠה׃

א ָדּרָה ְו ָנַסב

ְצרוֹן ְוﬠָ ָלה חֶ

בּרְ ֵנ ַ� ְו ָﬠַבר

ל ָק ֵדשׁ

And their south boundary ran from the end of the Dead Sea, from the
bay that faces southward; it **went out** southward of the ascent of
Akrabbim, **passed** along to Zin, and **went up** south of
Kadesh-barnea, **along** by Hez- ron, **up** to Addar, and **made a
turn** to Karka.

24 JOURNAL OF HEBREW SCRIPTURES

# *End of the Chain of Events*

Gen 41:57 (subject-verb)

אל־יוֹ ֵסף

ְבּשֹׁר ל

ְצ ַר ְימָה מִ

וּ<span dir="rtl">ָא</span>בּ

ו ָכל־ ָה ָא ֶרץ

All the world **came** to Joseph in Egypt to buy grain (NRSV).

Gen 45:15 (verb-subject)

אִוֹתּ׃

אחָיו

כֵןדִּ ְבּרוּ

ֵליהֶם ְו ַא ֲחרֵי ﬠ

ָכל־ ֶאחָיו ַו ֵיּבְ ְךּ ל

ו ְי ַנשֵּׁק

And he kissed all his brothers and wept upon them; and after that his
brothers **talked** with him (NRSV).

See also Exod 12,50; Josh 6:14; with *waw*: Josh 11:11; 11:23; 14:15;
24:33; Judg 1:8. Usually, the new sequence that follows begins with
<span dir="rtl">ויהי</span>.

# *Generic Parallelism*

Josh 4:14

את־יְהוֹ ֻשׁ ַ�

ִדּגַּל יְה ָוה ההוּא

<span dir="rtl">ם</span>וֹיּבּ

On that day the LORD **exalted** Joshua (NRSV).

In this case, SC is not parallel to another single verbal form, but
rather to the entire previous chain. See also Josh 4:19; 11:12.

# *Rhetoric*

The writer wishes to underline an element in a chain.

Josh 4:9

הֵ ִקים ְיהוֹ ֻ�שַׁ

*Those* twelve stones Joshua **set up**.

## . . . PC + SC in Poetry

***Epexegesis***

Ps 78:21

ָב ִנים א

ֵרה שׂﬠְ

<span dir="rtl">ים</span>תּ<span dir="rtl">ֵ</span>
<span dir="rtl">ְ</span>שׁוּ

ב ִי ְשׂרָ ֵאל׃

ָלה ﬠָ

ֲﬠקֹב ְו ַגם־ ַאף ב ַי

ו ִיּ ְת ַﬠ ָבּר ְו ֵאשׁ ִנ ְשּׂ ָקה

He was full of rage; a fire was kindled against Jacob, his anger
**mounted** against Israel (NRSV).

See also Ps 78:24.31.57 (without *waw*).66.

4.  **THE VERBAL FUNCTIONS IN A *NON-PAST/NON- ANTERIOR* SEQUENCE**
    
    14. ***PC AS THE FIRST VERB***

When PC falls in the first position it indicates the first *non-
past/non-anterior* action/state/event. It may or may not be the first
word in the sentence.

SEQUENCES OF VERBAL FORMS AND TAXIS 25

## PC as the First Verb in Direct Speech

1 Sam 18:11

I **will pin** David to the wall (NRSV). 1 Sam 17:32 (subject-verb)

ָד ִוד וּבַ ִקּיר בְ

אַ ֶכּה

Your servant **will go** (NRSV).

## PC as First Verb in a Secondary Clause

ﬠ ְבדְּ� ֵילֵ�

Also in secondary clauses when PC is the first verbal form in a chain,
it represents the first *non-past/non-anterior* action.

1 Sam 31:4

פּן־יָבוֹאוּ הָ ֲﬠ ֵר ִלים הָ ֵא ֶלּה . . .

So that these uncircumcised **may** not **come** . . . (NRSV).

In a past context, PC represents a “future in the past” action:

2 Kgs 13:14

ֲאשֶׁר יָמוּת וֹבּ

\[. . . the illness\] of which he **was to die** (NRSV).

## PC as the First Verb in a Main Sentence in Poetry

In poetry, when PC is the first verbal form in a chain it repre- sents
the first *non-past/non-anterior* action.

Ps 121:1 (*yiqtol*)

I **lift up** my eyes to the hills (NRSV).

ַני אֶל־ ֶה ָהרִים ﬠי

אָשּׂא

2.  ***OTHER CONSTRUCTIONS IN THE FIRST PLACE OF A***

***SEQUENCE***

As a *past/anterior* sequence can begin in any given way, and not only
with SC, a *non-past/non-anterior* can also begin in any given way.
For instance:

1 Sam 9:8 (non-verbal sentence)

. . . <span dir="rtl">ֶסף</span> כּ

ֶקל שׁ

ָי ִדי ֶר ַבע ב

ה ֵנּה ִנ ְמ ָצא

Here, I have with me a quarter shekel of silver . . . (NRSV).

1 Sam 17:25 (*we-haya*)

. . . וּנּכּ<span dir="rtl">ֶ</span> <span dir="rtl">ַי</span>
<span dir="rtl">ר־</span>שׁ<span dir="rtl">ֶ</span>
<span dir="rtl">א</span>

The man who kills him . . . (NRSV).

3.  ***PC AFTER ANOTHER PC***

ִאישׁ ה

ו ָה ָיה

If PC comes after another PC it expresses co-ordination.

26 JOURNAL OF HEBREW SCRIPTURES

## PC + PC in Main Sentence in Direct Speech

1.  ***Epexegesis***

Josh 6:26

בִּבְכֹרוֹ יְיַ ְסּ ֶד ָנּה וּבִ ְצ ִﬠירוֹ ַיצִּיב דְּ ָל ֶתי ָה׃

At the cost of his firstborn he **shall lay** its foundation, and at
the cost of his youngest he **shall set up** its gates\! (NRSV).

Both sentences clearly describe the same curse.

# *Parenthetical Remark*

1 Kgs 11:11–12

א�־

<span dir="rtl">׃</span>�דּ<span dir="rtl">ֶ</span>
<span dir="rtl">ְב</span> ﬠ<span dir="rtl">ַ</span>
<span dir="rtl">ל</span>

מ ָﬠ ֶלי� וּנ ַת ִתּיה

ַמּ ְמ ָל ָכה את־ה

ְקרַע א

קרֹ�ַ

ְקרָ ֶﬠ ָנּה׃ א

�<span dir="rtl">ְנ</span> בּ

ַיּד מ

א ִבי�

ַמ ַﬠן ָדּ ִוד ל

<span dir="rtl">ה</span>נּ<span dir="rtl">ָ</span>
שׂ<span dir="rtl">ֶ</span> ﬠ<span dir="rtl">ֱ</span>
<span dir="rtl">א</span>

בּ ָי ֶמי� ל ֹא

I **will** surely **tear** the kingdom from you and give it to your
servant. Yet for the sake of your father David I will not do it in
your lifetime; I **will tear** it out of the hand of your son (NRSV).

# *Parallelism*

Gen 27:39–40

ָﬠל׃ ְו ַﬠל־ מ

ָשּׁ ַמ ִים ה

ֶרץ יִ ְהיֶה מוֹ ָשׁ ֶב� וּ ִמ ַטּל ה ָא

ְשׁ ַמ ֵנּי מ

ה ֵנּה

חרְ ְ�בּ תִ ְח ֶיה

See, away from the fatness of the earth **shall** your home **be**,
and away from the dew of heaven on high. By your sword you **shall
live** (NRSV).

See also Josh 18:5b; 2 Sam 7:14.

# *List*

1 Sam 8:11–17

ל ְפ ֵני

ְר ַכּ ְבוֹתּ וּ ְב ָפ ָר ָשׁיו ְו ָרצוּ בּ ֶמ

אֶת־ ְבּ ֵני ֶכם ִיקָּח ְו ָשׂם לוֹ

. . .וֹתּ<span dir="rtl">ְב</span> כּ<span dir="rtl">ַ</span>
<span dir="rtl">ֶמרְ</span>

ו ֶאת־ ְבּנוֹתי ֶכם ִיקָּח . . .

ִבים ִיקָּח ְו ָנתַן הוֹטּ

ְשׂדוֹ ֵתיכֶם ְו ֶאת־כַּ ְר ֵמיכֶם ְו ֵזי ֵתיכֶם ו ֶאת־

ַל ֲﬠ ָבדָיו׃

ל ָס ִרי ָסיו ְו ַל ֲﬠ ָב ָדיו׃

ִל ְמ ַלא ְכוֹתּ׃

ֵﬠיכֶם ְוכַ ְר ֵמי ֶכם ַי ְשׂﬠֹר ְו ָנ ַתן ְבדֵי ֶכם . . . ִיקָּח ְו
ָשׂﬠָה ְו ַז ְר ְו ֶאת־ ַﬠ

ֹא ְנכֶם ַי ְשׂﬠֹר צ

ל ֲﬠ ָב ִדים׃

תִּ ְהיוּ־לוֹ

ו ַאתֶּם

He **will take** your sons and appoint them to his chariots and to be
his horsemen, and to run before his chariots; . . . He **will take**
your daughters . . . He **will take** the best of your fields and
vineyards and olive orchards and give them to his courtiers. He **will
take one-tenth** of your grain and of your vineyards and give it to
his officers and his cour- tiers. He **will take** your male and
female slave . . . and put

SEQUENCES OF VERBAL FORMS AND TAXIS 27

them to his work. He **will take one-tenth** of your flocks, and you
**shall be** his slaves (NRSV).

The series of PC is correctly interrupted four times by SC (see §
4.4).

## PC + PC in a Secondary Clause

1.  ***Epexegesis***

Josh 1:8 (with <span dir="rtl">אז</span>)

<span dir="rtl">יל</span>כּשׂ<span dir="rtl">ִ</span>
<span dir="rtl">ְ</span>תּ

אֶת־ ְדּ ָר ֶכ� ְואָז

כּי־ ָאז

For then you **shall make** your way prosperous, and then you **shall
be** successful (NRSV).

See also 2 Sam 16:18.

# *Parallelism*

Num 23:24

לֹא ִישְׁ ַכּב עד־י ֹאַכל ט ֶרף ְו ַדם־ ֲחלָלִים ִישְׁ ֶתּה׃

It does not lie down till it **devours** the prey, and **drinks**

the blood of the slain (RSV).

# *List*

Ps 72:12–14 (*yiqtol*, short *yiqtol*, *waw*-x-*yiqtol*, x-*yiqtol*
and *we*- *yiqtol*)

ֵוּ ַ� ְו ָﬠ ִני ְו ֵאין־עֹ ֵזר לוֹ מ ַשׁ

ְביוֹן א

כּי־ ַיצִּיל

יָ ֹחס ﬠל־ ַדּל ְו ֶא ְביוֹן

ו ַנפְוֹשׁת אבְיוֹ ִנים יוֹ ִשׁי�׃

מִ�וֹתּ וּמֵ ָחמָס ִי ְגַאל ַנ ְפשָׁם

ו ֵיי ַקר ָדּ ָמם בּ ֵﬠי ָניו׃

For he **delivers** the needy when they call, the poor and those who
have no helper. He **has pity** on the weak and the needy, and
**saves** the lives of the needy. From oppres- sion and violence he
**redeems** their life; and **precious is** their blood in his sight.

## PC + PC in a Main Sentence in Poetry

1.  ***Epexegesis***

Ps 42:6 (*yiqtol* and *wayyiqtol*)

מַה־ ִתּ ְוֹתּשֲׁחִיח ַנ ְפשִׁי ַותֶּ ֱה ִמי ﬠָ ָלי

Why **are you cast down**, O my soul, and are you **dis- quieted**
within me? (NRSV).

See also Ps 9:9 and 29:8 (x-*yiqtol* and *yiqtol* without *waw*).

# *Parallelism*

Ps 22:8 (subject-verb, *yiqtol*)

28 JOURNAL OF HEBREW SCRIPTURES

ָשׂפָה ָי ִניעוּ רֹאשׁ׃ בְ

לִי ַי ְפִיטרוּ

כּל־רֹאַי ַי ְל ִﬠגוּ

All who see me **mock** at me; they **make mouths** at me, they
**shake** their heads (NRSV).

See also Ps 29:9 (*yiqtol* and *wayyiqtol*); 102:27 (x-*yiqtol* and
*yiqtol*).

# *Negation*

See Isa 40:31.

# *List*

See Ps 18:26–30 (x-*yiqtol*); Isa 41:19 (*yiqtol*).

4.  ***SC IN THE SECOND POSITION***

SC in the second position expresses sub-ordination.

## . . . + SC in Direct Speech

Gen 17:15–16 (*weqatal* and *waw-*x*-qatal*)

<span dir="rtl">׃</span>הּ<span dir="rtl">ָמ</span> שׁ

ָרה שׂ

<span dir="rtl">י</span>כּ <span dir="rtl">ָרי</span> שׂ

ְשׁ ָמהּ את־

ְ�תּ ל ֹא־ ִת ְק ָרא א ְשׁ

שׂ ַרי

<span dir="rtl">ן</span>בּ �<span dir="rtl">ל</span>

מִמֶּ ָנּה

א ָתהּ ְו ַגם ָנתִַיתּ

וּ ֵברַ ְכ ִתּי

As for Sarai your wife, you shall not call her Sarai, but Sarah shall
be her name. I **will bless** her, and moreover I **will give** you a
son by her (NRSV).

Lev 26:44 (*negative*)

א ְי ֵבי ֶהם ל ֹא־מְ ַאְ ִסתּים ְולֹא־

ֶא ֶרץ בּ

ְהיוֹתם בּ

ו ַאף־ ַגּם־ז ֹאת

ג ַﬠ ְלִיתּם ל ַכ�תָם

Yet for all that, when they are in the land of their enemies, I
**will** not **spurn** them, or **abhor** them so as to destroy them
utterly (NRSV).

In these two occurrences of PC the writer underlines the fact that the
two verbal forms are successive even though negative.

1 Sam 20:18 (not *weqataltí*)

ָמ ָחר חֹדשׁ ְו ִנ ְפ ֕קַ ְדָתּ

Tomorrow is the new moon; you **will be missed** (NRSV).

See also 1 Sam 2:16.

## *4.4.2* . . . + SC in a Secondary Clause

Deut 4:19

. . . שׁ<span dir="rtl">ֶמ</span>
<span dir="rtl">ֶ</span>שּׁ<span dir="rtl">ַה</span>
<span dir="rtl">את־</span>

ַמ ְי ָמה ְורָ ִאי ָת ה ָשּׁ

ﬠי ֶני�

וּ ֶפן־ ִתּ ָשּׂא

And lest you lift up your eyes towards the heavens and **see**

the sun . . . Eccl 2:24

יּשׁ ֹאכל ְו ָשׁ ָתה

ָא ָדם בּ

אין־טוֹב

There is nothing better for mortals than to eat and **drink**

(NRSV).

SEQUENCES OF VERBAL FORMS AND TAXIS 29

In this example there can be no doubt that both PC and SC are in the
foreground, and that there is no difference in the aspect of the
action.

Ps 11:2 (without *waw*)

ﬠל־ ֶיתֶר

ָצּם ח

וּ<span dir="rtl">ננ</span>וֹכּ
<span dir="rtl">ת</span>שׁ<span dir="rtl">ֶ</span>
<span dir="rtl">ק</span>

ָשׁ ִﬠים ִי ְד ְרכוּן ה ְר

<span dir="rtl">ה</span>נּ<span dir="rtl">ֵ</span>
<span dir="rtl">ה</span> <span dir="rtl">י</span>כּ

For look, the wicked bend the bow, they **fit** their arrow to the
string.

See also Ps 73:27.

***4.4.3.* . . . + SC in Poetry**

Ps 110:6 (*qatal* without *waw*)

ֶא ֶרץ ַר ָבּה׃ ﬠל־

מַחץ ר ֹאשׁ

ֵלא ְג ִווֹיּת מָ

<span dir="rtl">יִם</span>וֹגּבּ

יָ ִדין

He will execute judgment among the nations; he **will fill** them with
corpses; he **will shatter** heads over the wide earth (NRSV).

Ps 132:17 (*qatal* without *waw*)

ל ְמ ִשׁי ִחי׃

ﬠרַ ְכ ִתּי ֵנר

ָד ִוד ל

ֶרן ק

שׁם א ְצ ִמי ַ�

There I will cause a horn to sprout up for David; I **will prepare** a
lamp for my anointed one.

Ps 73:18 (*qatal* without *waw*)

ל ַמוּשּׁאוֹת׃

ַפּ ְלָתּם ה

לָמוֹ

<span dir="rtl">ית</span>שׁ<span dir="rtl">ִ</span> תּ

א� בּ ֲח ָלקוֹת

Truly you set them in slippery places; you **make** them **fall**

to ruin (NRSV).

Isa 11:8 (*waw*-x-*qatal*)

הדָה׃

ְפעוֹ ִני ָגּמוּל ָידוֹ צ

ַרת מאוּ

ֶתן ְו ַﬠל פּ

ֻחר ﬠל־

<span dir="rtl">ֵנק</span> וֹ<span dir="rtl">י</span>
<span dir="rtl">ע</span>שׁ<span dir="rtl">ַ</span>
ﬠ<span dir="rtl">ֲ</span> שׁ<span dir="rtl">ִ</span>
<span dir="rtl">ו</span>

The nursing child shall play over the hole of the asp, and the weaned
child **shall put** its hand on the adder’s den (NRSV).

Isa 19:7 (*qatal* without *waw*)

ֹוְכל מ ְזרַע יְאוֹר ִייבַשׁ ִנדַּף

And all that is sown by the Nile will dry up, **be driven away**
(NRSV).

Isa 51:11 (*qatal* without *waw*)

שָׂוֹשׂן ְושִׂ ְמ ָחה ַי ִשּׂיגוּן ָנסוּ יָגוֹן ַו ֲא ָנחָה׃

They shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing

**shall flee** away (NRSV).

# *4.5. . . . SC + PC*

If the writer needs a co-ordinate element after SC, he/she comes back
to PC.

30 JOURNAL OF HEBREW SCRIPTURES

## . . . SC + PC in Direct Speech

1.  ***Epexegesis***

1 Kgs 1:35

תַּ ְחתָּי

ﬠל־כּ ְס ִאי ְוהוּא ִימְ��

ו ָי ַשׁב

He shall sit on my throne and **shall be king** in my place

In 1 Kgs 1:13 the verbal forms are in reverse order (see also 1 Kgs
1:17.30). See also Lev 26:42 (reference to the same cov- enant).

# *Parenthetical Remark*

Exod 12:8

ְמרִֹרים ﬠל־

ִלי־ ֵאשׁ וּ ַמוֹצּת צ

ֶזּה ה

ַלּ ְי ָלה בּ

ַה ָבּ ָשׂר את־

ו ָא ְכלוּ

י ֹא ְכ ֻלהוּ׃

They shall eat the lamb that same night; they **shall eat** it roasted
over the fire with unleavened bread and bitter herbs (NRSV).

# *Parallelism*

Gen 17:20–21

אָ ִקים

ְכ ִתּי . . . ְו ֶאת־ ְבּרִי ִתי בּ ַר

ֵנּה ה

�<span dir="rtl">י</span>תּ<span dir="rtl">ִ</span>
ﬠ<span dir="rtl">ְ</span> <span dir="rtl">ַמ</span> שׁ

ִי ְשׁ ָמ ֵﬠאל ִי ְצחָק וּ ְל ֶאת־

As for Ishmael, I have heard you; I bless him . . . , but my covenant
I **will establish** with Isaac.

God will do such and such with Ishmael, but, *at the same time,* he
will establish his covenant with Isaac.

Deut 2:28

תִֶּןתּ־ ִלי ְו ָשׁתִיתִי

<span dir="rtl">ֶסף</span> כּ<span dir="rtl">ֶ</span> בּ

ִבּ ֵר ִני ְו ָא ַכ ְל ִתּי וּ ַמ ִים תּ ְשׁ

<span dir="rtl">ֶסף</span> כּ<span dir="rtl">ֶ</span> בּ

א ֶכל

You shall sell me food for money, so that I may eat, and

**supply** me water for money, so that I may drink (NRSV).

The second action follows the first, but the third is parallel to the
first. For this reason the writer comes back to PC. The last action
follows the third and must be a SC.

# *End of the Chain of Events*

Exod 3:20

א ֶשׁר

אתַי

בְּכֹל ִנ ְפ ְל

ִמ ְצרַ ִים את־

ָידִי ְו ִה ֵכּיתִי את־

ו ָשׁ ַל ְח ִתּי

אתְ ֶכם׃

ִקרְוֹבּ ְו ַא ֲח ֵרי־כן ְישַׁ ַלּח בּ

א ֱשׂﬠֶה

So I will stretch out my hand and strike Egypt with all my wonders
that I will perform in it; after that he **will let** you **go**.
(NRSV).

SEQUENCES OF VERBAL FORMS AND TAXIS 31

# *In order to Underline an Element in a Chain*

Gen 17:20

ָﬠ ָשׂר ְנ ִשׂי ִאם שׁ ֵנים־

מאד

ְמאד בּ

אתוֹ

אתוֹ ְו ִה ְר ֵבּי ִתי

ו ִה ְפ ֵרי ִתי

יוֹליד וּ ְנ ַת ִתּיו לגוֹי ָגּדוֹל׃

I will make him fruitful and exceedingly numerous; *even* he **shall
be** the father of twelve princes, and I will make him a great nation.

Compare also Gen 17:6, 16.

## . . . SC + PC in Poetry

1.  ***Epexegesis***

Ps 77:13

. . . ְו ָה ִגי ִתי בְ ָכל־פָּ ֳﬠ ֶל� וּבַ ֲﬠ ִלילוֹ ֶתי� אִישׂ ָחה׃

. . . I will meditate on all your work, and **muse** on your mighty
deeds (NRSV).

Joel 2:20 (short *yiqtol*)

. . . וֹ<span dir="rtl">ָנת</span> <span dir="rtl">ֲח</span>
<span dir="rtl">צ</span>

ְאוֹשׁ ְו ַת ַﬠל ב

וﬠָ ָלה

Its stench and foul smell **will rise up** . . . (NRSV).

# *Parallelism*

Isa 49:11

ֶר� וּ ְמ ִס� ַתי ְירֻמוּן׃ ל ָדּ

ָה ַרי כל־

ו ַשׂ ְמ ִתּי

And I will turn all my mountains into a road, and my highways **shall
be raised up** (NRSV).

See also Isa 49:22.

# *End of the Chain of Events*

Jer 46:26

ֶל�־בָּבֶל מ

ְקשֵׁי ַנ ְפשָׁם וּבְ ַיד ְנבוּכַ ְד ֶראצַּר מ ַב

וּ ְנתַתִּים בְּ ַיד

ֵמי־ ֶקדֶם ְנאֻם־ ְיה ָוה כּי

<span dir="rtl">ֹן</span>כּשׁ<span dir="rtl">ְ</span>תּ

וּבְ ַיד־ ֲﬠבָ ָדיו ְו ַא ֲח ֵרי־כן

I will hand them over to those who seek their life, to King
Nebuchadrezzar of Babylon and his officers. Afterward Egypt **shall be
inhabited** as in the days of old, says the LORD (NRSV).

5.  **COROLLARIES**
    
    15. ***THE IMPERATIVE***

Most scholars have recognized sequences headed by impera- tives. My
theory asserts that in these sequences the imperative does not possess
any special function, while SC keeps its sub- ordinate function
exactly as when it comes after PC (for a dif- ferent opinion on
precative *qatal*, see Andrason 2013). Below are a few examples
demonstrating that the *waw* is not relevant:

32 JOURNAL OF HEBREW SCRIPTURES

Ps 22:22 (*waw-*x*-qatal*)

ﬠ ִני ָתנִי׃

ֵיה וּ ִמ ַקּ ְר ֵני ֵר ִמים א ְר

ִפּי מ

הוֹ ִשׁי ֵﬠ ִני

Save me from the mouth of the lion\! And from the horns of the wild
oxen **rescue** me\!

Ps 71:3 (*qatal* without *waw*)

ִוּיָת ְלהוֹ ִשׁיﬠ ִני צ

ִמיד תּ

לבוֹא

מעוֹן

לי לצוּר

ה ֵיה

Be to me a rock of refuge, a strong fortress, always **order**

to save me.

See also Ps 4:2; Isa 43:9.

16. ***PH ASAL ASPECTS***

As I have stated above, the opposition between the two groups of
sequences can be used in some contexts to distinguish between
different phasal or quantificational aspects (for the dif- ferent
kinds of aspects compare Dick 1987: 63; Bhat 1999: 53–

54; Cook 2012: 25–26).

It is a common view that *yiqtol* is used in BH to express repeated
action. Such a function is usually associated with an aspect
(imperfective, cursive, frequentative, habitual, iterative, etc.) or
with a mood (Ḥatav 1997: 145–46; Voitila 2001: 197 n. 90; Joosten
2002: 62). This is not completely correct, however: PC expresses
repeated action only in a past context, while the examples usually
offered of its use in a non-past context (see for instance GKC § 107g;
Joosten 2002: 63) can be understood as expressing general present or
future. Instead, a repeated action is expressed in a non-past context
by SC.

In order to express habitual or iterative aspects (for a more detailed
discussion on the difference between the two, see Dahl 1985: 97), as
well as the durative aspect, BH uses the second group of sequences in
a past context and the first group in a non-past context.

To complicate matters, this implies full homonymy between this use and
that which we examined in the first part of our inquiry:

1.  In a past context the second group of sequences can denote relative
    tense (future in the past) or aspect (habit- ual/iterative or
    durative).

2.  In a non-past context the first group of sequences can denote
    anteriority or aspect (habitual/iterative or durative).

Finally, the relationship between aspects and sequences in a past
context has been recognized by several authors (see for instance
Lambdin 1971: 108; Waltke and O’Connor 1990: 527– 29). However, it
must be added that—as always with sequences—the introductory dominant
verb can be omitted.

SEQUENCES OF VERBAL FORMS AND TAXIS 33

## Habitual and Iterative in the Past and Non-Past

Gen 2:6 (past, PC + SC)

ְפּ ֵני־ ָה ֲא ָד ָמה׃ את־כּל־

ֶרץ ְו ִהְשׁקה מן־הָאָ

ואֵד ַיﬠֲ ֶלה

But a stream **would rise** from the earth, and **water** the whole
face of the ground (NRSV).

Ps 122:4 (non-past, SC)

To it the tribes **go up** (NRSV).

2 Sam 15:1–2 (past, x + *waw* + SC)

ָב ִטים שְׁ

וּ<span dir="rtl">ל</span>ﬠ

שֶׁשָּׁם

ָניו׃ לפָ

אִישׁרָ ִצים

ָכּ ָבה ְוסֻסִים ַו ֲח ִמשִּׁים מרְ

ְבשָׁלוֹם א

וֹ<span dir="rtl">ל</span>
שׂ<span dir="rtl">ַ</span>ﬠיּ<span dir="rtl">ַ</span>
<span dir="rtl">ו</span>

השָּׁ ַﬠר

ﬠַל־ ַיד ֶדּרֶ�

ְבשָׁלוֹם ְו ָﬠַמד א

ו ִהְ ִכּשׁים

After this Absalom got himself a chariot and horses, and fifty men to
run ahead of him. **Absalom** used to rise early and **stand** beside
the road into the gate (NRSV).

In the previous example the introductory dominant verb is omitted.

Ps 33:10 (non-past, SC + SC: *qatal* without *waw*)

ﬠ ִמּים׃

ְח ְשׁבוֹת מ

ִניא הֵ

ַצת־וֹגּ ִים ﬠֲ

ִפיר הֵ

יהוָה

The LORD **brings** the counsel of the nations to nothing; he
**frustrates** the plans of the peoples (NRSV).

Ps 33:13–14 (non-past, SC + SC: *qatal* without *waw*)

האָ ָדם׃

אֶת־ ָכּל־ ְבּ ֵני

הִ ִבּיט ְיהוָהרָ ָאה

מִ ָשּׁמַ ִים

The LORD **looks down** from heaven; he **sees** all human- kind
(NRSV).

Ps 65:10 (non-past, SC + PC + PC: *qatal*, *wayyiqtol* and

*yiqtol*)

<span dir="rtl">ה</span>נּ<span dir="rtl">ָ</span>
<span dir="rtl">רֶ</span>שׁ<span dir="rtl">ְ</span>
ﬠ<span dir="rtl">ְ</span> תּ

ה ָארֶץ ַו ְשׁתֹּ ְקֶ ָקהרַ ַבּת

פּ ַקדְ ָתּ

You **visit** the earth and **water** it, you greatly **enrich** it
(NRSV).

Ps 99:7 (past, PC + SC: *yiqtol* and *qatal* without *waw*)

ְוחֹק ָנתַן־ ָלמוֹ׃ ﬠדֹתָיו

ְמרוּ שָׁ

ֵלי ֶהם אֲ

ﬠָ ָנן ְידַ ֵבּר

<span dir="rtl">ד</span>וּמּﬠ<span dir="rtl">ַ</span>
<span dir="rtl">ְ</span>בּ

He **spoke** to them in the pillar of cloud; they **kept** his
decrees, and the statutes that he gave them (NRSV).

For further examples in the non-past, see also: Jer 8:7; Ps 88:10.14;
119:10–14; Job 6:17–20. For others in the past, see Joosten (2012:
285–87).

## Durative in the Past and Non-Past

With some verbs, the equivalent function is not habitual or iterative,
but durative: “Les états et les activités représentent des usages
‘duratifs’, tandis que les procès d’accomplissement,

34 JOURNAL OF HEBREW SCRIPTURES

d’achèvement et de semelfactif entrent dans le type ‘fréquenta- tif’ ”
(Voitila 2001: 206 n. 105; compare Joosten 2012: 286).

2 Sam 4:2 (past, PC)

ﬠל־ ִבּ ְנ ָימִן׃

תּ ָחֵשׁב

גּם־ ְבּ ֵארוֹת

For Beeroth **was considered** to belong to Benjamin (see Joosten
2012: 286).

Gen 31:15 (non-past, SC)

הֲלוֹא ָנ ְכ ִרוֹיּת ֶנ ְחַ ְשׁבנוּ לוֹ

**Are** we not **regarded** by him as foreigners? (NRSV). 1 Sam 9:9
(past, PC)

הרֹאֶה׃

ִנים לפָ

הַוֹיּם ִי ָקּרֵא

ָנּבִיא ל

כִּי

For the one who is now called a prophet **was** formerly

**called** a seer (NRSV). Isa 48:2 (non-past, SC)

כּי־מֵ ִﬠיר הקֹּדֶשׁ ִנ ְקרָאוּ

For they **call** themselves after the holy city (NRSV).

See also Jer 15:18.

3.  ***THE DOUBLING OF SEQUENCES***

In this phase, BH had the ability to double a sequence. We have
already seen two instances with SC and PC:

Ps 74:13–15

ﬠל־ ַה ָמּ ִים׃

ִנּי ִנים ת

שִׁ ַבּ ְר ָתּ ָראשֵׁי

ל ִצ ִיּים׃

ָﬠם ל

ֲא ָכל מ

וּנּ<span dir="rtl">נ</span>תּ<span dir="rtl">ֶ</span>
<span dir="rtl">ְִ</span>תּ

ְו ָיתָן ל

אתָּה ִר ַצּ ְצתָּ ָרא ֵשׁי

מ ְﬠ ָין ָו ָנחַל

בָ ַקְﬠָתּ

אתָּה

Both וּנּ<span dir="rtl">ֶנ</span>
<span dir="rtl">ְ</span>תּ<span dir="rtl">ִ</span>תּ and
<span dir="rtl">ָ</span>תּﬠ<span dir="rtl">ְ</span>
<span dir="rtl">בקַ</span> continue the verbal form
תּ<span dir="rtl">ָ</span>
<span dir="rtl">ַצְ</span>צּ<span dir="rtl">ִר</span> . Put dif-

ferently, the sequence is doubled. We can describe this process in a
simple way, see Figure 3.




<svg width="224" height="216">
  <image id="image0" width="224" height="216" x="0" y="0"
    xlink:href="data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAOAAAADYCAIAAAB9Znh2AAAABGdBTUEAALGPC/xhBQAAACBjSFJN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" />
</svg>

The same process occurs three times in 1 Sam 8:11–17 (§ 4.3.1):

ֶאת־ ְבּ ֵני ֶכם ִיקָּח ְושָׂם . . . ְורָצוּ . . .

ְו ֶאת־ ְבּנוֹתי ֶכם ִי ָקּח . . .

ְו ֶאת־ ְשׂדוֹתי ֶכם . . . ִיקָּח ְו ָנַןת . . .

ְו ַזרְ ֵﬠי ֶכם . . . ַיﬠְשֹׂר ְו ָנַןת . . .

The scheme is quite simple, see Figure 4.

SEQUENCES OF VERBAL FORMS AND TAXIS 35


<svg width="232" height="264">
  <image id="image0" width="232" height="264" x="0" y="0"
    xlink:href="data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAOgAAAEICAIAAADa+C8ZAAAABGdBTUEAALGPC/xhBQAAACBjSFJN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" />
</svg>


It is more difficult to observe such a process if the verbal forms are
the same (SC and SC or PC and PC), see Figure 5.




<svg width="344" height="112">
  <image id="image0" width="344" height="112" x="0" y="0"
    xlink:href="data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAVgAAABwCAIAAADUhv/4AAAABGdBTUEAALGPC/xhBQAAACBjSFJN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" />
</svg>


A possible example, however, is provided by Exod 17:1–4:

ﬠל־ ִפּי

ַמסְ ֵﬠיהֶם ל

ִי ְשׂ ָר ֵאל מִמִּ ְד ַבּר־סִין בּ ֵני־

ֲﬠ ַדת כּל־

ו ִיּסְעוּ

תּת הָ ָﬠם׃

שׁ<span dir="rtl">ְ</span> <span dir="rtl">ל</span>

ִים מ

יה ָוה ַו ַיּ ֲחנוּ בִּ ְרפִי ִדים ְו ֵאין

ְו ִנ ְשׁ ֶתּה ַויּ ֹאמר מ ִים

ָלנוּ תּנוּ־

ֶשׁה ַויּ ֹאמרוּ ﬠם־מ

ָﬠם ה

.1 ַו ָיּרֶב

את־ ְיה ָוה׃

ְתּ ַנוּסּן מה־

<span dir="rtl">ִדי</span> מּ<span dir="rtl">ָ</span> ﬠ

ְתּ ִריבוּן מה־

ֶשׁה מ

ל ֶהם

ָמּה ֶזּה ל

ַויּ ֹא ֶמר מ ֶשׁה

ﬠל־

ָﬠם ה

ַמּ ִים ַו ָיּ ֶלן ל

<span dir="rtl">ם</span>ﬠ<span dir="rtl">ָ</span>
<span dir="rtl">ה</span> <span dir="rtl">ם</span>שׁ

.2 ַו ִיּ ְצָמא

ָצּ ָמא׃ בּ

ְו ֶאת־ ָבּ ַני ְו ֶאת־מ ְק ַני א ִתי

ָה ִמית ל

ה ֱﬠ ִלי ָתנוּ מִמִּ ְצ ַר ִים

ַﬠט מ

ֶזּה עוֹד ה

ָﬠם ל

א ֱﬠ ֶשׂה מה

לאמר

ְיה ָוה אל־

ֶשׁה מ

ַו ִיּ ְצ ַﬠק

ְסקָ ֻל ִני׃ וּ

From the wilderness of Sin the whole congregation of the Israelites
journeyed by stages, as the LORD commanded. They camped at Rephidim,
but there was no water for the people to drink.

1.  The people **quarreled** with Moses, and said, “Give us water to
    drink. “Moses said to them,” Why do you quarrel with me? Why do you
    test the LORD?”

2.  (But) the people **thirsted** there for water; and the people
    complained against Moses and said, “Why did you bring us out of
    Egypt, to kill us and our children and live- stock with thirst?” So
    Moses cried out to the LORD, “What shall I do with this people? They
    are almost ready to stone me” (NRSV).

(I would omit the conjunction “but” from the translation of NRSV.)

If the writer had used SC to begin the second sequence, he would have
lost the link with the starting point of the narra- tive. He could
therefore only use PC.

The *Redaktionsgeschichte* can explain *why* we find a discus- sion
between Moses and the people twice. I explain *how* this is possible:
In BH, the writer can double a sequence.

36 JOURNAL OF HEBREW SCRIPTURES

Some other possible examples of this phenomenon include Gen 37:5–6;
42:18–26; Deut 31:22–30.

6.  **OVERRIDING ISSUES**
    
    1.  ***THE SAME SYNTAX IN EVERY CONTEXT***

When I started my research I believed, as many scholars did, that
Hebrew syntax was different in narration, direct speech and poetry.
The result of this research was thus unexpected: one finds the same
sequences and the same taxis across these literary contexts.

It is usually held that a difference exists between narration and
direct speech for the following reasons:

1.  The first sentence of the Bible is interpreted as *in the beginning
    when God created*. Hence, the first verbal form of the narrative
    would be a *wayyiqtol* (<span dir="rtl">ֹאמֶר</span>
    יּ<span dir="rtl">ַו</span> ).

2.  Twelve books in the Bible begin with PC.

3.  The use of SC at the beginning of a sequence in narra- tion is
    considered background information.

4.  There are several examples of *wayyiqtol* in narration which become
    *qatal* in direct speech (Niccacci 1986: 27–30), for

instance Gen 40:2 (narration) <span dir="rtl">ִריסיו</span>
<span dir="rtl">ס</span>

שׁ ֵני

פּ ְרעֹה ﬠל

ו ִיּ ְקצֹף

becomes (direct speech): <span dir="rtl">ָדיו</span>
<span dir="rtl">ָב</span> ﬠ<span dir="rtl">ֲ</span>
<span dir="rtl">ַל־</span>ﬠ <span dir="rtl">ַצף</span>
<span dir="rtl">ק</span>

ְרעֹה פּ

in Gen 41:10.

Instead, based on the results of my research I can state the
following:

1.  The first sentence can be understood in a traditional way: “In the
    beginning God created,” the first verbal form of the narrative is a
    *qatal* (§ 3.1.3).

2.  In most instances, these twelve books represent (or at least they
    seek to represent) the continuation of a previous book. Hence, PC is
    not the first verbal form in the narrative chain. However, there are
    some occurrences of PC as a real absolute beginning, which I explain
    as a different syntax (§ 6.3).

3.  *Qatal* in the beginning of a sequence usually expresses the most
    important information in the sequence. Hence, it should be
    considered a foreground form.

4.  The *wayyiqtol*s in the above mentioned examples depend on the fact
    that the actions follow another one and are thus not the first ones
    in the sequence, while the *qatal*s in direct speech represent the
    first actions of the sequence.

In other words, there are no strong arguments in favour of two
different syntaxes. On the contrary, one finds the same syntactical
rules in narration and in direct speech, as is clear in the next
example:

Josh 13:1

בּאָת

א ָתּה ָזקַ ְנ ָתּה

ָליו א

ִמים ַויּ ֹא ֶמר ְיה ָוה בּ ָיּ

בָּא

ויהוֹ ֻ�שַׁ ָז ֵקן

ב ָיּמִים ְוהָ ָא ֶרץ ִנ ְשׁ ֲא ָרה הַ ְר ֵבּה־מְאד ל ִר ְשׁ ָהּתּ׃

Now Joshua **was old** and **advanced** in years; and the LORD said to
him, “You **are old** and **advanced** in years, and very much of the
land still remains to be possessed.” (NRSV).

SEQUENCES OF VERBAL FORMS AND TAXIS 37

The two couples of SC indicate the same fact that was still true when
the LORD spoke. The first is a stative *qatal* and the second a
fientive *qatal* without *waw.* The direct speech repeats exactly the
same verbal forms and the same word order (sub- ject-verb-verb). The
couples of SC are in the foreground; otherwise in the direct speech
there would be no foreground action.

2.  ***OTHER KINDS OF ANALYSIS***

In this short study, I have examined the functions of SC and PC only
in simple sequences. In order to correctly understand a text, one
should also consider other elements such as word semantics, rhetoric,
*Redaktionsgeschichte,* and so on.

For instance, the idiomatic expression “to eat and to drink” (which we
have encountered twice in the examples quoted above) should be
considered as a hendiadys: “to have a meal.” From a syntactical point
of view it is composed of two different successive verbs, but it
expresses only one concept (Cohen 2010–2011: 20–21). The same can be
said for “to an- swer and to say,” “to speak and to say,” and so on
(for a detailed list see Joosten 2012: 167–68). It is useful to recall
Waltke and O’Connor’s explanation in this regard:

Another syntactic approach is based on the use of two Hebrew verbs in
sequence, corresponding to a verb + ad- verb construction in other
languages . . . Examples of such usage are furnished by verbs such
<span dir="rtl">שוב</span> and <span dir="rtl">יסף</span>**,** which
are often rendered with adverbs such as “again, further, con-
tinually,” etc. This syntactic approach to what European languages
take as an adverbial function is properly a matter for the Hebrew
lexicon; once the pattern is appreciated as an integral part of
Hebrew, it requires little grammatical notice (Waltke and O’Connor
1990:656).

In poetry, SC and PC are not only used in sequences, but also in more
elaborated constructions such as *chiasms.* These con- structions are
able to express more complex meanings such as, for instance,
*merismus* (Watson 2007:205). This is a matter of rhetoric.

3.  ***TOWARD A DIACHRONIC ANALYSIS***

In this study I have only presented a synchronic analysis. Many
questions have yet to be answered, issues which require a dia- chronic
analysis.

For the moment, in lieu of this type of analysis, I wish to stress one
final point: I do not suppose that the “taxis syntax” was the *only*
verbal syntax of Standard BH.

The existence of two syntaxes in Standard BH can be detected in the
following examples:

38 JOURNAL OF HEBREW SCRIPTURES

Jer 31:29

ְק ֶהי ָנה תּ

בנִים

ְכלוּ בֹ ֶסר ְו ִשׁ ֵנּי אָ

אבוֹת

The parents **have eaten** sour grapes, and the children’s teeth were
set on edge.

Ezek 18:2

אבוֹת י ֹא ְכלוּ בֹסֶר ְו ִשׁ ֵנּי הַ ָבּ ִנים תּ ְקהֶי ָנה

The parents **eat** sour grapes, and the children’s teeth are set on
edge.

Jeremy employs the standard pattern SC + PC (without *waw*), whereas
Ezekiel uses two PCs in order to express two con- secutive actions.

Isa 37:27

וּשׁ<span dir="rtl">וָבֹ</span> וּתּ<span dir="rtl">ח</span>

ְצ ֵרי־ ָיד ק

ויֹ ְשׁ ֵביהן

Their inhabitants, shorn of strength, are dismayed and

**confounded** (NRSV). 2 Kgs 19:26

וּשׁ<span dir="rtl">בֹ</span>יּ<span dir="rtl">ֵ</span>
<span dir="rtl">וַ</span> וּתּ<span dir="rtl">ח</span>

ְצ ֵרי־ ָיד ק

ויֹ ְשׁ ֵביהן

Their inhabitants, shorn of strength, are dismayed and

**confounded** (NRSV).

Isaiah keeps the standard pattern in order to indicate the same state
with two verbal forms: SC + SC. 2 Kings employs *way- yiqtol* as an
equivalent to *qatal*.

2 Kgs 20:12

ֶל�־בָּבֶל מ

בְּר ֹא ַד� בַּ ְל ֲא ָדן בֶּן־בַּ ְל ֲא ָדן שׁ ַלח

ִהיא ה

<span dir="rtl">ת</span>ﬠ<span dir="rtl">ֵ</span>
<span dir="rtl">ָ</span>בּ

חָ ָלה חִ ְז ִק ָיּהוּ כּי

ַמע שָׁ

ִח ְז ִק ָיּהוּ כּי אל־

ס ָפ ִרים וּ ִמ ְנ ָחה

At that time King Merodach-Baladan son of Baladan of Babylon sent
envoys with letters and a present to Heze- kiah, for he **had heard**
that Hezekiah had been sick (NRSV).

Isa 39:1

ָפ ִרים ס

ֶל�־ ָבּ ֶבל מ

ַבּ ְל ֲא ָדן בּן־

ְל ֲא ָדן בּ

ַד� מרֹ

ַלח שׁ

ִהוא ה

<span dir="rtl">ת</span>ﬠ<span dir="rtl">ֵ</span> בּ

ח ָלה ַו ֶיּ ֱח ָזק׃

אל־חִ ְז ִק ָיּהוּ ַו ִיְּ ַשׁמע כּי

וּ ִמ ְנחָה

At that time King Merodach-Baladan son of Baladan of Babylon sent
envoys with letters and a present to Heze- kiah, for he **heard** that
he had been sick and had recov- ered. (NRSV).

In a few instances, the two syntaxes appear side by side:

Ps 22:5b–6a

אֵ ֶלי� ָז ֲﬠקוּ ְו ִנְ ָמלטוּ

בּטְחוּ ַותְּ ַפ ְלּ ֵטמוֹ׃

They trusted, and you **delivered** them. To you they cried, and
**were saved** (NRSV).

SEQUENCES OF VERBAL FORMS AND TAXIS 39

In the first sentence we see the standard pattern: SC + PC, but in the
second we find two SCs used to express two consecutive actions.

Obviously, one could affirm that these examples are simple variants
due to the carelessness of copyists. This would open the much broader
question as to how much we can rely on the Masoretic text—an issue
that clearly cannot be addressed in more detail in this article.

4.  ***ARE* WAYYIQTOL*, SHORT* YIQTOL *AND LONG* YIQTOL *EQUIVALENT?
    ARE* QATAL *AND* WEQATAL *EQUIVALENT?***

In chapter 2.4, I hypothesized that *at one point in the development
of BH*—possibly due to their similarity—long and short *yiqtol* as
well as *wayyiqtol* were used in an analogous way, and the same was
true of *qatal* and *weqatal*.

At the same time, however, I have refrained from affirm- ing whether
or not they are actually equivalent as far as their semantics are
concerned.

If they are not semantically equivalent, the two equiv- alences only
concern the categories of coordination and subor- dination and the
present inquiry can be considered complete.

If they are semantically equivalent, however, this means that the
differences between short and long *yiqtol* and *wayyiqtol* and
between *qatal* and *weqatal* are only phonetic and that the *waw* in
the *wayyiqtol* and in the *weqatal* is nothing more than a
conjunction (an idea already put forth by Lee 1827: 361).

In order to better explore this extremely important issue, further
investigation dealing with the theories of Qimron, Torres Fernández,
Bloch, Van de Sande and others would be necessary, an examination
which lies beyond the scope of this study.

7.  **FINAL CONSIDERATIONS**

This study presented a collection of empirical data, which appears to
illustrate how, in one phase of the Hebrew language, syntax was based
on a combination of sequences and taxis*.* This syntax was identical
in narrative, direct speech and poetic contexts. SC and PC had
different functions in a *past/anterior* sequence and in a
*non-past/non-anterior* sequence. In a *past/ante- rior* sequence, SC
denoted a co-ordinate element, whereas PC denoted a sub-ordinate
element. In a *non-past/non-anterior* sequence, PC denoted a
co-ordinate element while SC denoted a sub-ordinate element. Hence,
*wayyiqtol* was not equivalent to *qatal* and *weqatal* was not
equivalent to *yiqtol.* The historical dif- ferences between short and
long *yiqtol* and *wayyiqtol* and between *qatal* and *weqatal* were
lost in this phase.

However, many questions remain unanswered: When did this system begin?
When did it end? Where exactly do we find it?

Even the list of syntactical constructions is not complete. In
particular, due to lack of space, I did not examine the following
instances:

40 JOURNAL OF HEBREW SCRIPTURES

1.  Hypothetical constructions.

2.  Sequences introduced by a particle such as
    <span dir="rtl">הנה</span>.

3.  Sequences introduced by an infinitive.

4.  Purpose clauses.

5.  Participle.

6.  Deontic PC.

All the same, what has been made clear by this analysis is that BH
possessed a refined and sophisticated verbal system through which it
was possible to express more than just a few nuances of meaning.

SEQUENCES OF VERBAL FORMS AND TAXIS 41

**REFERENCES**

Andersen, D. 2000. The Evolution of the Hebrew Verbal System. *ZAH*
13: 1–66.

Andrason, A. 2010. The Panchronic *Yiqtol*. Functionally Consistent
and Cognitively Plausible. *JHS* 10/10.

Andrason, A. 2011a. Biblical Hebrew *Wayyiqtol*: A Dynamic Definition.
*JHS* 11/7.

Andrason, A. 2011b. The Biblical Hebrew Verbal System in Light of
Grammaticalization: The Second Generation. *HS* 52: 19–51.

Andrason, A. 2011c. The BH *Weqatal*. A Homogenous Form with no
Haphazard Functions (Part One). *JNSL* 37/2: 1– 26.

Andrason, A. 2011d. Making It Sound – The *Performative*

Qatal and Its Explanation. *JHS* 12/8.

Andrason, A. 2013. An Optative Indicative? A Real Factual Past? Toward
a Cognitive-Typological Approach to the Precative *Qatal*. *JHS* 13/4.

Bauer, H., and Leander, P. 1922. *Historische Grammatik der
hebräischen Sprache des Alten Testamentes.* Tübingen: Niemeyer
(repr., Hildesheim: Olms, 1991).

Bybee, J., Perkins, R., and Pagliuca W. 1994. *The Evolution of
Grammar: Tense, Aspect, and Modality in the Languages of the World*.
Chicago: University of Chicago.

Bhat, D.N.S. 1999. *The Prominence of Tense, Aspect, and Mood*.

Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing.

Bloch, Y. 2007. From Linguistics to Text-Criticism and Back: Wayyiqṭōl
Constructions with Long Prefixed Verbal Forms in Biblical Hebrew. *HS*
48: 141–70.

Bloch, Y. 2010. The Prefixed Perfective in the Construction
<span dir="rtl">ֹל</span> <span dir="rtl">ְקט</span>
<span dir="rtl">יִ</span> <span dir="rtl">ז</span>אָ and Its Later
Replacement by the Long Prefixed Verbal Form: A Syntactic and
Text-Critical Analysis. *JNSL* 36/2: 49–74.

Böttcher, F. 1868. *Ausführliches Lehrbuch der hebräischen Sprache*.

Vol. 2. Leipzig: Barth.

Brockelmann, C. 1956. *Hebräische Syntax.* Glückstadt: Neu- kirchener
Verlag.

(“He ate and drank, and rose and went his way. Thus Esau

despised his birthright.” Regarding the meaning of con- secutive forms
in Biblical Hebrew). *Mehqarim b-Lashon* 13: 13–37.

Cook, J.A. 2012. *Time and the Biblical Hebrew Verb: The Expres- sion
of Tense, Aspect, and Modality in Biblical Hebrew* (Linguis- tic
studies in ancient West Semitic, 7). Winona Lake: Eisenbrauns.

Dahl, Ö. 1985. *Tense and Aspect Systems*. Oxford: Blackwell. Driver,
S. 1892. *A Treatise on the Use of the Tenses in Hebrew and*

*Some Other Syntactical Problems*. Oxford: Clarendon.

42 JOURNAL OF HEBREW SCRIPTURES

Ewald, H. 1836. *A Grammar of the Hebrew Language of the Old
Testament* (trans. Nicholson, J.). London: Williams and Norgate.

Gell, P. 1821. *Observations on the Idiom of the Hebrew Language.*

London: Watts.

Ḥatav, G. 1997. *The Semantics of Aspect and Modality: Evidence from
English and Biblical Hebrew*. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: Benjamins
Publishing.

Ḥatav, G. 2004. Anchoring World and Time in Biblical Hebrew. *Journal
of Linguistics* 40: 491–526.

Held, M. 1962. *The* Yqtl-Qtl *(*Qtl-Yqtl*) Sequence of Identical
Verbs in Biblical Hebrew and Ugaritic*. In: Ben-Horin, M., Weinryb,
B.D., and Zeitlin, S. (eds.)*. Studies and Essays in Honor of Abraham
A. Neuman.* Leiden: E. J. Brill. 281–90.

Hitzig, F. 1833. *Der Prophet Jesaja*. Heidelberg: Winter.

Jenni, E. 1981. *Lehrbuch der hebräischen Sprache des Alten Testa-
ments.* Basel: Helbing und Lichtenhahn.

Joosten, J. 1999. The Long Form of the Prefixed Conjuga- tion
Referring to the Past in Biblical Hebrew Prose*. HS* 40: 15–26.

Joosten, J. 2002. Do the Finite Verbal Forms in Biblical Hebrew
Express Aspect?. *Journal of Ancient Near East Stud- ies* 29: 49–70.

Joosten, J. 2012. *The Verbal System of Biblical Hebrew. A New
Synthesis Elaborated on the Basis of Classical Prose*. Jerusalem:
Simor.

Joüon, P. 1923. *Grammaire de l’hébreu biblique*. Rome: Institut
biblique pontifical.

Joüon, P., and Muraoka, T. 2006. *A Grammar of Biblical Hebrew*
(SubBi, 27). Rome: Editrice Pontificio Intituto Biblico.

Kautzsch, E. (ed). 1910. *Gesenius’ Hebrew Grammar* (trans.

Cowley, A.E.). Oxford: Clarendon.

Kuryłowicz, J.K. 1973. Verbal Aspect in Semitic. *Orientalia*

42: 114–20.

Lambdin, T.O. 1971. *Introduction to Biblical Hebrew*. New York:
Charles Scribner’s Sons.

Lee, S. 1827. *A Grammar of the Hebrew Language*. London: Duncan.

Maslov, J. 1988. Resultative, Perfect and Aspect. In: Nedjalkov, V.
(ed.). *Typology of Resultative Constructions*.
Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company. 63–85.

McFall, L. 1982. *The Enigma of the Hebrew Verbal System: Solu- tions
from Ewald to the Present Day* (Historic Texts and Inter- preters in
Biblical Scholarship, 2). Sheffield: Almond Press.

Meyer, R. 1972. *Hebräische Grammatik. Band III: Satzlehre*. Ber- lin:
De Gruyter.

Michel, D. 1960. *Tempora und Satzstellung in den Psalmen*. Bonn:
Bouvier.

SEQUENCES OF VERBAL FORMS AND TAXIS 43

Niccacci, A. 1986. *Sintassi del verbo ebraico nella prosa biblica
classica* (SBF Analecta, 23). Jerusalem: Franciscan Printing Press.

Niccacci, A. 1991. *Lettura sintattica della prosa ebraico-biblica.
Principi e applicazioni* (SBF Analecta, 31). Jerusalem: Fran- ciscan
Printing Press.

Niccacci, A. 2006. Biblical Hebrew Verbal System in Poetry. In:
Fassberg, S., and Hurvitz, A. (eds.). *Biblical Hebrew in Its
Northwest Semitic Setting: Typological and Historical Perspectives*.
Winona Lake: Eisenbrauns. 247–68.

Qimron, E. 1998. <span dir="rtl">בעברית</span>
<span dir="rtl">העתיד</span> <span dir="rtl">צורות</span>
<span dir="rtl">לפירוש</span> <span dir="rtl">חדשה</span>
<span dir="rtl">הצעה</span> <span dir="rtl">הקדומה</span> (A New
Proposal for the Interpretation of Prefix Conjugation Forms in Ancient
Hebrew). *Lešonenu* 61: 31– 43.

Rainey, A.F. 2003. The *Yaqtul* Preterite in Northwest Semitic. In:
Baasten, M.F.J., and van Peursen, W.R. (eds.). *Hamlet on a Hill:
Semitic and Greek Studies Presented to Professor*

*T. Muraoka on the Occasion of His Sixty-Fifth Birthday* (OLA, 118).
Leuven: Peeters. 395–407.

Rogland, M. 2003. *Alleged Non-Past Uses of* Qatal *in Classical
Hebrew*. Assen: Van Gorcum.

Torres Fernández, A. 2013. ‘Tiempo’ y ‘aspecto’ en la conju- gación
hebrea (Parte IV-1): Reflexiones de un octagenerio. *Miscelánea de
Estudios Árabes y Hebraicos. Sección Hebreo* 63: 189–225.

Van de Sande, A. 2008. *Nouvelle perspective sur le système verbal de
l’hébreu ancien. Les formes \*qatala, \*yaqtul et \*yaqtulu*. Louvain-
la-Neuve: Peeters.

Voitila, A. 2001. *Présent et imparfait de l’indicatif dans le Penta-
teuque grec. Une étude sur la syntaxe de traduction*. Helsinki:
Société d’Exégèse de Finlande, and Göttingen: Vanden- hoeck &
Ruprecht.

Wagner, A. 1997. *Sprechakte und Sprechaktanalyse im Alten Tes-
tament.* Berlin: De Gruyter.

Warren, A. 2002. Modality, Reference and Speech Acts in the Psalms.
*Tyndale Bulletin* 53: 149–52.

Waltke, B.K., and O’Connor, M. P. 1990. *An Introduction to Biblical
Hebrew Syntax*. Winona Lake: Eisenbrauns.

Watson, W.G.E. 2007. *Classical Hebrew Poetry: A Guide to Its
Techniques*. New York: T\&T Clark.

Zatelli, I. 2004. The Study of Ancient Hebrew Lexicon. Application of
the Concepts of Lexical Field and Func- tional Language. *KUSATU
(Kleine Untersuchungen zur Spra- che des Alten Testaments und seiner
Umwelt)* 5: 129–59.
